src/tutorial/introduction.rst, before:

.. _cylc-introduction:

Introduction
============

.. TODO

.. warning::

   This section of the tutorial still contains screenshots of the obsolete Cylc
   7 desktop GUI.

.. _cylc-what-is-a-workflow:

What Is A Workflow?
-------------------

.. epigraph::

   A workflow consists of an orchestrated and repeatable pattern of business
   activity enabled by the systematic organization of resources into processes
   that transform materials, provide services, or process information.

   -- Wikipedia

.. ifnotslides::

   In research, business and other fields we may have processes that we repeat
   in the course of our work. At its simplest a workflow is a set of steps that
   must be followed in a particular order to achieve some end goal.

   We can represent each "step" in a workflow as a oval and the order with
   arrows.

.. nextslide::

.. digraph:: bakery
   :align: center

   "purchase ingredients" -> "make dough" -> "bake bread" -> "sell bread"
   "bake bread" -> "clean oven"
   "pre-heat oven" -> "bake bread"


.. _cylc-what-is-cylc:

What Is Cylc?
-------------

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc (pronounced silk) is a workflow engine, a system that automatically
   executes tasks according to their schedules and dependencies.

   In a Cylc workflow each step is a computational task, a script to execute.
   Cylc runs each task as soon as it is appropriate to do so.

.. minicylc::
   :align: center
   :theme: demo

    a => b => c
    b => d => f
    e => f

.. nextslide::

Cylc can automatically:

- Submit tasks across computer systems and resource managers.
- Recover from failures.
- Repeat workflows.

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc was originally developed at NIWA (The National Institute of Water and
   Atmospheric Research - New Zealand) for running their weather forecasting
   workflows. Cylc is now developed by an international partnership including
   members from NIWA and the Met Office (UK). Though initially developed for
   meteorological purposes Cylc is a general purpose tool as applicable in
   business as in scientific research.

.. nextslide::

.. ifslides::

   * Originally developed at NIWA (New Zealand)
   * Now developed by an international partnership including the
     Met Office (UK).
   * General purpose tool as applicable in business as in
     scientific research.

.. nextslide::

Cylc provides a variety of command line and GUI tools for visualising and
interacting with workflows.

.. image:: img/cylc-gui.png

.. nextslide::

.. ifslides::

   :ref:`tutorial-cylc-graphing`

Commit message:

Re write of the cylc tutorials (#383)
* delete all images of Cylc 7 gui from tutorials/img
* Removed warnings from tutorial intro.
* Added Cylc8 GUI images.
* use cylc get-resources api-key
Co-authored-by: Ronnie Dutta <61982285+MetRonnie@users.noreply.github.com>
* response to review
* moved task job state icon shortcuts to hyperlinks.rst.include
* added postcard of Cylc UI tool screenshots
Co-authored-by: Oliver Sanders <oliver.sanders@metoffice.gov.uk>
* refactored section on uusing the Cylc GUI and TUI
Co-authored-by: Ronnie Dutta <61982285+MetRonnie@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Oliver Sanders <oliver.sanders@metoffice.gov.uk>
* Response to review

src/tutorial/introduction.rst, after:

.. _cylc-introduction:

Introduction
============

.. _cylc-what-is-a-workflow:

What Is A Workflow?
-------------------

.. epigraph::

   A workflow consists of an orchestrated and repeatable pattern of business
   activity enabled by the systematic organization of resources into processes
   that transform materials, provide services, or process information.

   -- Wikipedia

.. ifnotslides::

   In research, business and other fields we may have processes that we repeat
   in the course of our work. At its simplest a workflow is a set of steps that
   must be followed in a particular order to achieve some end goal.

   We can represent each "step" in a workflow as a oval and the order with
   arrows.

.. nextslide::

.. digraph:: bakery
   :align: center

   "purchase ingredients" -> "make dough" -> "bake bread" -> "sell bread"
   "bake bread" -> "clean oven"
   "pre-heat oven" -> "bake bread"


.. _cylc-what-is-cylc:

What Is Cylc?
-------------

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc (pronounced silk) is a workflow engine, a system that automatically
   executes tasks according to their schedules and dependencies.

   In a Cylc workflow each step is a computational task, a script to execute.
   Cylc runs each task as soon as it is appropriate to do so.

.. minicylc::
   :align: center
   :theme: demo

    a => b => c
    b => d => f
    e => f

.. nextslide::

Cylc can automatically:

- Submit tasks across computer systems and resource managers.
- Recover from failures.
- Repeat workflows.

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc was originally developed at NIWA (The National Institute of Water and
   Atmospheric Research - New Zealand) for running their weather forecasting
   workflows. Cylc is now developed by an international partnership including
   members from NIWA and the Met Office (UK). Though initially developed for
   meteorological purposes Cylc is a general purpose tool as applicable in
   business as in scientific research.

.. nextslide::

.. ifslides::

   * Originally developed at NIWA (New Zealand)
   * Now developed by an international partnership including the
     Met Office (UK).
   * General purpose tool as applicable in business as in
     scientific research.

.. nextslide::

Cylc provides a variety of command line and GUI tools for visualising and
interacting with workflows. Shown below are Cylc TUI (Text User Interface),
GUI and ``cylc scan``.

.. image:: /tutorial/img/cylc-tools.png
   :alt: A screenshot of several Cylc tools.

.. nextslide::

.. ifslides::

   :ref:`tutorial-cylc-graphing`
