src/user-guide/installing-workflows.rst, before:

.. _Installing-workflows:

Installing Workflows
====================

Cylc commands identify workflows via their names, which are relative path names
under the :term:`cylc-run directory`, ``~/cylc-run/`` by default.

Workflows can be grouped together under sub-directories. E.g. there are three
workflows in the example below: ``nwp/oper/region1``, ``nwp/oper/region2`` and
``nwp/test/region1``.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc scan --state=all --name nwp --format=tree
   nwp
   ├─oper
   │ ├─ region1
   │ └─ region2
   └─test
      └─ region1

This chapter will demonstrate how to install a workflow from an arbitrary
location, called a :term:`source directory`.
``cylc install`` will create a new directory in the :term:`cylc-run directory`
for each installation of a workflow.

.. _Install-Workflow:

The Cylc Install Command
------------------------

Workflows can be installed with the ``cylc install`` command, which creates
the :term:`run directory` structure and some service files underneath it.

.. note::

   It is possible to run a workflow without installation by writing it
   directly in the :term:`run directory`.
   However, it is considered best practice to write your workflow in a source
   directory and use ``cylc install`` to create a fresh run directory for you.

.. _Using Cylc Install:

Using Cylc Install
------------------

The following commands, executed from the :term:`source directory`
``~/cylc-src/my-flow``, result in the following installations:

+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Command                              | Results in Installation in Directory |
+======================================+======================================+
| cylc install                         |    ~/cylc-run/my-flow/run1           |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| cylc install --no-run-name           |    ~/cylc-run/my-flow                |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| cylc install --run-name=new-run      |    ~/cylc-run/my-flow/new-run        |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| cylc install --flow-name=new-name    |    ~/cylc-run/new-name/run1          |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

Any of the above commands may be run from anywhere on the file system with the
addition of the option ``--directory=PATH/TO/SOURCE/DIRECTORY`` (alternatively,
``-C PATH/TO/SOURCE/DIRECTORY``).

Configurable Source Directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is also possible to configure a list of directories that ``cylc install``
and the GUI will search for source directories inside, using
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[install]source dirs`. For example, if you have

.. code-block:: cylc

   # global.cylc
   [install]
       source dirs = ~/cylc-src, ~/roses

then ``cylc install dogs/fido`` will search for a workflow source directory
``~/cylc-src/dogs/fido``, or, failing that, ``~/roses/dogs/fido``, and install
the first match (into ``~/cylc-run/dogs/fido/run1``).

Numbered Runs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, cylc install will install the workflow found in the current working
directory into ``~/cylc-run/$(basename $PWD)/runN``, where runN = run1, run2,
run3,...

``cylc install`` will automatically increment the run number of each install,
provided the options ``--no-run-name`` or ``--run-name`` are not used. See
:ref:`Using Cylc Install` for example behaviour.

For convenience, a symlink to the most recent (highest numbered) run will be
created in the workflow directory, ``runN``.

Example: A typical run directory structure, after three executions of
``cylc install`` will look as follows.

.. code-block:: none

   ├── _cylc-install
   │   └── source -> /home/cylc-src/test-flow
   ├── run1
   │   ├── flow.cylc
   │   └── log
   │       └── install
   │           └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   ├── run2
   │   ├── flow.cylc
   │   └── log
   │       └── install
   │           └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   ├── run3
   │   ├── flow.cylc
   │   └── log
   │       └── install
   │           └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   └── runN -> /home/cylc-run/test-flow/run3

The numbered runs option may be overridden, using either the ``--no-run-name``
or the ``--run-name`` options.


Named Runs
^^^^^^^^^^

As an alternative to numbered runs, it is possible to name the runs, using the
``--run-name`` option.
In this case, the runN symlink will not be created.
This option cannot be used in conjunction with numbered runs.


The Cylc Install Process
------------------------

There are two main parts of the ``cylc install`` process.

1. File Installation

2. Symlinking of Directories

.. _File Installation:

1. File Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Installation will involve copying the files found in the source directory into
a new run directory. If you wish to install files into an existing run
directory, use ``cylc reinstall``, see :ref:`Reinstalling a Workflow`.

Excluding Items From Installation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

By default, cylc install will exclude ``.git``, ``.svn`` directories.
To configure excluded files and directories from the file installation,
create a ``.cylcignore`` file in your source directory, this supports
pattern matching.

The following example will detail how to install a workflow, including
configuring files to be excluded from the installation.

.. _Example Installation:

Example Installation
""""""""""""""""""""

For example:
We will look at running the cylc install command inside the directory
``~/cylc-src/test-flow`` with the following directory structure:

.. code-block:: console

   $ pwd
   /home/cylc-src/test-flow

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all
   ├── .cylcignore
   ├── dir1
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir2
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── file1
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── textfile1.txt
   └── textfile2.txt

We wish to omit any files matching the pattern ``*.txt``,  the file
``file1``, the contents of ``dir1`` and the contents of ``dir2`` including the
directory itself.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cat .cylcignore
   *.txt
   file1
   dir1/*
   dir2


Now we are ready to install our workflow.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc install
   INSTALLED test-flow from home/cylc-src/test-flow -> home/cylc-run/test-flow/run1

Looking at the directory structure that has been created

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all home/cylc-run/test-flow/run1
   ├── dir1
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── log
   │   └── install
   │       └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   └── .service


.. _Symlinking of Directories:

2. Symlinking of Directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Upon running ``cylc install``, symlinks for the directories ``run``, ``log``,
``share``, ``share/cycle`` and ``work`` will be created in accordance with
the symlink rules for ``localhost`` as defined in
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[install][symlink dirs]`.

Override default symlink locations
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

You can override the default locations set in
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[install][symlink dirs]` by using the ``--symlink-dirs``
option with ``cylc install``.

For example, using the command line option
``--symlink-dirs="log=$DIR, run=/path/to/dir,..."`` will symlink:

- ``$DIR -> ~/cylc-run/workflow/log``
- ``/path/to/dir -> ~/cylc-run/workflow/run``

.. note::

   If configuring symlink dirs on the command line, the global configured
   symlink dirs will not be used to source directories not included in
   the command line list.


To skip making localhost symlinks
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Use `--symlink-dirs=""` with the `cylc install` command.



Automatically Generated Directories and Files
---------------------------------------------

Running ``cylc install`` will generate some extra files in your workflow run
directory.

- The :term:`service directory` will be created in preparation for running the
  workflow. This is needed to store essential files used by Cylc.

- A ``_cylc-install`` directory containing a ``source`` symlink to the
  :term:`source directory`.
  This is needed to enable Cylc to determine the original workflow source
  for ``cylc reinstall``.

- A new ``install`` directory in the workflow's log directory, with a
  time-stamped install log file containing information about the installation.

Cylc plugins (such as :ref:`Cylc Rose`) may generate additional files.


.. _Reinstalling a Workflow:

Reinstalling a Workflow
-----------------------

To apply changes made in your workflow source directory to the installed
workflow directory, run ``cylc reinstall`` from within the workflow run
directory.
A new log file will be created in the workflow install log directory, detailing
changes made.

``cylc reinstall`` can be executed from anywhere on the file system. To do this
provide the named run you wish to reinstall.
For example:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc reinstall myflow/run1

Cylc will determine the source directory and update your workflow.

Returning to the example from above (see :ref:`Example Installation`).

The source directory, ``~/cylc-src/test-flow`` has been altered as follows:

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all ~/cylc-src/test-flow
   ├── .cylcignore
   ├── dir1
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir2
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir3
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── file1
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── textfile1.txt
   └── textfile2.txt

.. code-block:: console

   $ cat .cylcignore
   *.txt
   file1
   dir2

We wish to update our ``~/cylc-run/test-flow/run1`` with the directories ``dir1``
and ``dir3``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cylc reinstall test-flow/run1

or cylc reinstall from within the run directory

.. code-block:: console

    $ cylc reinstall

The run directory now looks as follows:

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all home/cylc-run/test-flow/run1
   ├── dir1
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir3
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── log
   │   └── install
   │       └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   │       └── <time-stamp>-reinstall.log
   └── .service


Expected Errors
---------------

There are some occasions when installation is expected to fail.

If:

- ``log``, ``share``, ``work`` or ``_cylc-install`` directories exist in the
  :term:`source directory`

- neither :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` nor the deprecated suite.rc are found in
  the :term:`source directory`

- the run-name is specified as ``_cylc-install``

- the workflow name is an absolute path or invalid

  Workflow names are validated by
  :py:class:`cylc.flow.unicode_rules.WorkflowNameValidator`.

  .. autoclass:: cylc.flow.unicode_rules.WorkflowNameValidator

- the install will create nested run directories, i.e. installing a
  workflow in a subdirectory of an existing run directory.

- trying to install a workflow into an already existing run directory,
  ``cylc reinstall`` should be used for this, see
  :ref:`Reinstalling a Workflow`.

- the source directory path does not match the source directory path of a
  previous installation. i.e. running ``cylc install`` in
  ``~/cylc-src/my-flow``, followed by running ``cylc install`` from
  ``~/cylc-different-sources/my-flow``.

.. warning::

    The following combinations of ``cylc install`` are forbidden and will
    result in error.

    - ``cylc install --run-name=my-run-name --no-run-name``

    - Running ``cylc install --run-name=my-run-name`` followed by
      ``cylc install --no-run-name``

    - Running ``cylc install --no-run-name`` followed by
      ``cylc install --run-name=my-run-name``

Commit message:

Ban on recursive installation  documented

src/user-guide/installing-workflows.rst, after:

.. _Installing-workflows:

Installing Workflows
====================

Cylc commands identify workflows via their names, which are relative path names
under the :term:`cylc-run directory`, ``~/cylc-run/`` by default.

Workflows can be grouped together under sub-directories. E.g. there are three
workflows in the example below: ``nwp/oper/region1``, ``nwp/oper/region2`` and
``nwp/test/region1``.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc scan --state=all --name nwp --format=tree
   nwp
   ├─oper
   │ ├─ region1
   │ └─ region2
   └─test
      └─ region1

This chapter will demonstrate how to install a workflow from an arbitrary
location, called a :term:`source directory`.
``cylc install`` will create a new directory in the :term:`cylc-run directory`
for each installation of a workflow.

.. _Install-Workflow:

The Cylc Install Command
------------------------

Workflows can be installed with the ``cylc install`` command, which creates
the :term:`run directory` structure and some service files underneath it.

.. note::

   It is possible to run a workflow without installation by writing it
   directly in the :term:`run directory`.
   However, it is considered best practice to write your workflow in a source
   directory and use ``cylc install`` to create a fresh run directory for you.

.. _Using Cylc Install:

Using Cylc Install
------------------

The following commands, executed from the :term:`source directory`
``~/cylc-src/my-flow``, result in the following installations:

+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Command                              | Results in Installation in Directory |
+======================================+======================================+
| cylc install                         |    ~/cylc-run/my-flow/run1           |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| cylc install --no-run-name           |    ~/cylc-run/my-flow                |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| cylc install --run-name=new-run      |    ~/cylc-run/my-flow/new-run        |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| cylc install --flow-name=new-name    |    ~/cylc-run/new-name/run1          |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

Any of the above commands may be run from anywhere on the file system with the
addition of the option ``--directory=PATH/TO/SOURCE/DIRECTORY`` (alternatively,
``-C PATH/TO/SOURCE/DIRECTORY``).

Configurable Source Directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is also possible to configure a list of directories that ``cylc install``
and the GUI will search for source directories inside, using
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[install]source dirs`. For example, if you have

.. code-block:: cylc

   # global.cylc
   [install]
       source dirs = ~/cylc-src, ~/roses

then ``cylc install dogs/fido`` will search for a workflow source directory
``~/cylc-src/dogs/fido``, or, failing that, ``~/roses/dogs/fido``, and install
the first match (into ``~/cylc-run/dogs/fido/run1``).

Numbered Runs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, cylc install will install the workflow found in the current working
directory into ``~/cylc-run/$(basename $PWD)/runN``, where runN = run1, run2,
run3,...

``cylc install`` will automatically increment the run number of each install,
provided the options ``--no-run-name`` or ``--run-name`` are not used. See
:ref:`Using Cylc Install` for example behaviour.

For convenience, a symlink to the most recent (highest numbered) run will be
created in the workflow directory, ``runN``.

Example: A typical run directory structure, after three executions of
``cylc install`` will look as follows.

.. code-block:: none

   ├── _cylc-install
   │   └── source -> /home/cylc-src/test-flow
   ├── run1
   │   ├── flow.cylc
   │   └── log
   │       └── install
   │           └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   ├── run2
   │   ├── flow.cylc
   │   └── log
   │       └── install
   │           └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   ├── run3
   │   ├── flow.cylc
   │   └── log
   │       └── install
   │           └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   └── runN -> /home/cylc-run/test-flow/run3

The numbered runs option may be overridden, using either the ``--no-run-name``
or the ``--run-name`` options.


Named Runs
^^^^^^^^^^

As an alternative to numbered runs, it is possible to name the runs, using the
``--run-name`` option.
In this case, the runN symlink will not be created.
This option cannot be used in conjunction with numbered runs.


The Cylc Install Process
------------------------

There are two main parts of the ``cylc install`` process.

1. File Installation

2. Symlinking of Directories

.. _File Installation:

1. File Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Installation will involve copying the files found in the source directory into
a new run directory. If you wish to install files into an existing run
directory, use ``cylc reinstall``, see :ref:`Reinstalling a Workflow`.

Excluding Items From Installation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

By default, cylc install will exclude ``.git``, ``.svn`` directories.
To configure excluded files and directories from the file installation,
create a ``.cylcignore`` file in your source directory, this supports
pattern matching.

The following example will detail how to install a workflow, including
configuring files to be excluded from the installation.

.. _Example Installation:

Example Installation
""""""""""""""""""""

For example:
We will look at running the cylc install command inside the directory
``~/cylc-src/test-flow`` with the following directory structure:

.. code-block:: console

   $ pwd
   /home/cylc-src/test-flow

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all
   ├── .cylcignore
   ├── dir1
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir2
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── file1
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── textfile1.txt
   └── textfile2.txt

We wish to omit any files matching the pattern ``*.txt``,  the file
``file1``, the contents of ``dir1`` and the contents of ``dir2`` including the
directory itself.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cat .cylcignore
   *.txt
   file1
   dir1/*
   dir2


Now we are ready to install our workflow.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc install
   INSTALLED test-flow from home/cylc-src/test-flow -> home/cylc-run/test-flow/run1

Looking at the directory structure that has been created

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all home/cylc-run/test-flow/run1
   ├── dir1
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── log
   │   └── install
   │       └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   └── .service


.. _Symlinking of Directories:

2. Symlinking of Directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Upon running ``cylc install``, symlinks for the directories ``run``, ``log``,
``share``, ``share/cycle`` and ``work`` will be created in accordance with
the symlink rules for ``localhost`` as defined in
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[install][symlink dirs]`.

Override default symlink locations
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

You can override the default locations set in
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[install][symlink dirs]` by using the ``--symlink-dirs``
option with ``cylc install``.

For example, using the command line option
``--symlink-dirs="log=$DIR, run=/path/to/dir,..."`` will symlink:

- ``$DIR -> ~/cylc-run/workflow/log``
- ``/path/to/dir -> ~/cylc-run/workflow/run``

.. note::

   If configuring symlink dirs on the command line, the global configured
   symlink dirs will not be used to source directories not included in
   the command line list.


To skip making localhost symlinks
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Use `--symlink-dirs=""` with the `cylc install` command.



Automatically Generated Directories and Files
---------------------------------------------

Running ``cylc install`` will generate some extra files in your workflow run
directory.

- The :term:`service directory` will be created in preparation for running the
  workflow. This is needed to store essential files used by Cylc.

- A ``_cylc-install`` directory containing a ``source`` symlink to the
  :term:`source directory`.
  This is needed to enable Cylc to determine the original workflow source
  for ``cylc reinstall``.

- A new ``install`` directory in the workflow's log directory, with a
  time-stamped install log file containing information about the installation.

Cylc plugins (such as :ref:`Cylc Rose`) may generate additional files.


.. _Reinstalling a Workflow:

Reinstalling a Workflow
-----------------------

To apply changes made in your workflow source directory to the installed
workflow directory, run ``cylc reinstall`` from within the workflow run
directory.
A new log file will be created in the workflow install log directory, detailing
changes made.

``cylc reinstall`` can be executed from anywhere on the file system. To do this
provide the named run you wish to reinstall.
For example:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc reinstall myflow/run1

Cylc will determine the source directory and update your workflow.

Returning to the example from above (see :ref:`Example Installation`).

The source directory, ``~/cylc-src/test-flow`` has been altered as follows:

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all ~/cylc-src/test-flow
   ├── .cylcignore
   ├── dir1
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir2
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir3
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── file1
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── textfile1.txt
   └── textfile2.txt

.. code-block:: console

   $ cat .cylcignore
   *.txt
   file1
   dir2

We wish to update our ``~/cylc-run/test-flow/run1`` with the directories ``dir1``
and ``dir3``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cylc reinstall test-flow/run1

or cylc reinstall from within the run directory

.. code-block:: console

    $ cylc reinstall

The run directory now looks as follows:

.. code-block:: console

   $ tree -all home/cylc-run/test-flow/run1
   ├── dir1
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── dir3
   │   ├── another-file
   │   └── file
   ├── file2
   ├── file3
   ├── flow.cylc
   ├── log
   │   └── install
   │       └── <time-stamp>-install.log
   │       └── <time-stamp>-reinstall.log
   └── .service


Expected Errors
---------------

There are some occasions when installation is expected to fail.

If:

- ``log``, ``share``, ``work`` or ``_cylc-install`` directories exist in the
  :term:`source directory`

- neither :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` nor the deprecated suite.rc are found in
  the :term:`source directory`

- the run-name is specified as ``_cylc-install``

- the workflow name is an absolute path or invalid

  Workflow names are validated by
  :py:class:`cylc.flow.unicode_rules.WorkflowNameValidator`.

  .. autoclass:: cylc.flow.unicode_rules.WorkflowNameValidator

- the install will create nested run directories, i.e. installing a
  workflow in a subdirectory of an existing run directory.

- the install will create nested install directories. Neither a new
  installation in a subdirectory of an existing one, or a directory containing
  an existing installation are permitted. For example, having installed a
  workflow in ``bar`` you would be unable to install one in ``foo``
  or ``foo/bar/baz``.

  .. code-block:: bash

      foo
      `-- bar
         |-- _cylc-install
         |-- baz
         |-- run1
         `-- runN


- trying to install a workflow into an already existing run directory,
  ``cylc reinstall`` should be used for this, see
  :ref:`Reinstalling a Workflow`.

- the source directory path does not match the source directory path of a
  previous installation. i.e. running ``cylc install`` in
  ``~/cylc-src/my-flow``, followed by running ``cylc install`` from
  ``~/cylc-different-sources/my-flow``.

.. warning::

    The following combinations of ``cylc install`` are forbidden and will
    result in error.

    - ``cylc install --run-name=my-run-name --no-run-name``

    - Running ``cylc install --run-name=my-run-name`` followed by
      ``cylc install --no-run-name``

    - Running ``cylc install --no-run-name`` followed by
      ``cylc install --run-name=my-run-name``
