src/tutorial/scheduling/datetime-cycling.rst, before:

.. _nowcasting: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nowcasting_(meteorology)

.. _tutorial-datetime-cycling:

Date-Time Cycling
=================


In the last section we looked at writing an :term:`integer cycling` workflow,
one where the :term:`cycle points <cycle point>` are numbered.

.. ifnotslides::

   Typically workflows are repeated at a regular time interval, say every day
   or every few hours. To make this easier Cylc has a date-time cycling mode
   where the :term:`cycle points <cycle point>` use date and time specifications
   rather than numbers.

.. admonition:: Reminder
   :class: tip

   :term:`Cycle points <cycle point>` are labels. Cylc runs tasks as soon as
   their dependencies are met so cycles do not necessarily run in order.


.. _tutorial-iso8601:

ISO8601
-------

In Cylc, dates, times and durations are written using the :term:`ISO8601` format
- an international standard for representing dates and times.

.. _tutorial-iso8601-datetimes:

ISO8601 Date-Times
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   In ISO8601, datetimes are written from the largest unit to the smallest
   (i.e: year, month, day, hour, minute, second in succession) with the ``T``
   character separating the date and time components. For example, midnight
   on the 1st of January 2000 is written ``20000101T000000``.

   For brevity we may omit seconds (and minutes) from the time i.e:
   ``20000101T0000`` (``20000101T00``).

   For reability we can add hyphens (``-``) between the date components
   and colons (``:``) between the time components.
   This is optional, but if you do this you must use both hyphens *and* colons.

   Time-zone information can be added onto the end. UTC is written ``Z``,
   UTC+1 is written ``+01``, etc. E.G: ``2000-01-01T00:00Z``.

.. Diagram of an iso8601 datetime's components.

.. image:: ../img/iso8601-dates.svg
   :width: 75%
   :align: center

.. _tutorial-iso8601-durations:

ISO8601 Durations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   In ISO8601, durations are prefixed with a ``P`` (for "period") and are
   written with a character following each unit:

* ``Y`` for year.
* ``M`` for month.
* ``D`` for day.
* ``W`` for week.
* ``H`` for hour.
* ``M`` for minute.
* ``S`` for second.

.. nextslide::

.. ifnotslides::

   As with datetimes the components are written in order from largest to
   smallest and the date and time components are separated by the ``T``
   character. E.G:

* ``P1D``: one day.
* ``PT1H``: one hour.
* ``P1DT1H``: one day and one hour.
* ``PT1H30M``: one and a half hours.
* ``P1Y1M1DT1H1M1S``: a year and a month and a day and an hour and a
  minute and a second.


Date-Time Recurrences
---------------------

In :term:`integer cycling`, workflows' recurrences are written ``P1``, ``P2``,
etc.

In :term:`date-time cycling <datetime cycling>` there are two ways to write
recurrences:

1. Using ISO8601 durations (e.g. ``P1D``, ``PT1H``).
2. Using ISO8601 date-times with inferred recurrence.

.. _tutorial-inferred-recurrence:

Inferred Recurrence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   A recurrence can be inferred from a date-time by omitting digits from the
   front. For example, if the year is omitted then the recurrence can be
   inferred to be annual. E.G:

.. code-block:: sub

   2000-01-01T00   # Datetime - midnight on the 1st of January 2000.

        01-01T00   # Every year on the 1st of January.
           01T00   # Every month on the first of the month.
             T00   # Every day at midnight.
             T-00  # Every hour at zero minutes past (every hour on the hour).

.. note::

   To omit hours from a date time we must place a ``-`` after the
   ``T`` character.

Recurrence Formats
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   As with integer cycling, recurrences start, by default, at the
   :term:`initial cycle point`. We can override this in one of two ways:

1. By defining an arbitrary cycle point (``datetime/recurrence``):

   * ``2000/P4Y``: every fourth year starting with the year 2000.
   * ``2000-01-01T00/T00``: every day at midnight starting on the 1st of January
     2000
   * ``2000-01-01T12/T00``: every day at midnight starting on the first midnight
     after the 1st of January at 12:00 (i.e. ``2000-01-02T00``).

.. nextslide::

.. _tutorial-cylc-datetime-offset-icp:

2. By defining an offset from the initial cycle point (``offset/recurrence``).
   This offset is an ISO8601 duration preceded by a plus character:

   * ``+P1Y/P1Y``: every year starting one year after the initial cycle point.
   * ``+PT1H/T00``: every day starting on the first midnight after the point one
     hour after the initial cycle point.

Durations And The Initial Cycle Point
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using durations, beware that a change in the initial cycle point
might produce different results for the recurrences.

.. nextslide::

.. list-table::
   :class: grid-table

   * - .. code-block:: cylc
          :emphasize-lines: 2

          [scheduling]
              initial cycle point = 2000-01-01T00
              [[graph]]
                  P1D = foo[-P1D] => foo

     - .. code-block:: cylc
          :emphasize-lines: 2

          [scheduling]
              initial cycle point = 2000-01-01T12
              [[graph]]
                  P1D = foo[-P1D] => foo

   * - .. digraph:: Example
          :align: center

          size = "3,3"

          "foo.1" [label="foo\n2000-01-01T00"]
          "foo.2" [label="foo\n2000-01-02T00"]
          "foo.3" [label="foo\n2000-01-03T00"]

          "foo.1" -> "foo.2" -> "foo.3"

     - .. digraph:: Example
          :align: center

          size = "3,3"

          "foo.1" [label="foo\n2000-01-01T12"]
          "foo.2" [label="foo\n2000-01-02T12"]
          "foo.3" [label="foo\n2000-01-03T12"]

          "foo.1" -> "foo.2" -> "foo.3"

.. nextslide::

We could write the recurrence "every midnight" independent from the initial
cycle point by:

* Use an `inferred recurrence`_ instead (i.e. ``T00``).
* Overriding the recurrence start point (i.e. ``T00/P1D``)
* Using the ``[scheduling]initial cycle point constraints`` setting to
  constrain the initial cycle point (e.g. to a particular time of day). See
  the `Cylc User Guide`_ for details.

The Initial & Final Cycle Points
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   There are two special recurrences for the initial and final cycle points:

* ``R1``: repeat once at the initial cycle point.
* ``R1/P0Y``: repeat once at the final cycle point.

.. TODO - change terminology as done in the cylc user guide, "repeat" can be
   confusing. Use occur?

Inter-Cycle Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   Inter-cycle dependencies are written as ISO8601 durations, e.g:

* ``foo[-P1D]``: the task ``foo`` from the cycle one day before.
* ``bar[-PT1H30M]``: the task ``bar`` from the cycle 1 hour 30 minutes before.

.. ifnotslides::

   The initial cycle point can be referenced using a caret character ``^``, e.g:

* ``baz[^]``: the task ``baz`` from the initial cycle point.


.. _tutorial-cylc-datetime-utc:

UTC Mode
--------

.. ifnotslides::

   Due to all of the difficulties caused by time zones, particularly with
   respect to daylight savings, we typically use UTC (that's the ``+00`` time
   zone) in Cylc workflows.

   When a workflow uses UTC all of the cycle points will be written in the
   ``+00`` time zone.

   To make your workflow use UTC set the ``[scheduler]UTC mode`` setting to ``True``,
   i.e:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       UTC mode = True


.. _tutorial-datetime-cycling-practical:

Putting It All Together
-----------------------

.. ifslides::

   We will now develop a simple weather forecasting workflow.

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc was originally developed for running operational weather forecasting. In
   this section we will outline a basic (dummy) weather-forecasting workflow and
   explain how to implement it in cylc.

   .. note::

      Technically the workflow outlined in this section is a `nowcasting`_ workflow.
      We will refer to it as forecasting for simplicity.

   A basic weather-forecasting workflow consists of three main steps:

1. Gathering Observations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   We gather observations from different weather stations and use them to
   build a picture of the current weather. Our dummy weather forecast
   will get wind observations from four weather stations:

   * Aldergrove
   * Camborne
   * Heathrow
   * Shetland

   The tasks which retrieve observation data will be called
   ``get_observations_<site>`` where ``site`` is the name of the weather
   station in question.

   Next we need to consolidate these observations so that our forecasting
   system can work with them. To do this we have a
   ``consolidate_observations`` task.

   We will fetch wind observations **every three hours starting from the initial
   cycle point**.

   The ``consolidate_observations`` task must run after the
   ``get_observations<site>`` tasks.

.. digraph:: example
   :align: center

   size = "7,4"

   get_observations_aldergrove -> consolidate_observations
   get_observations_camborne -> consolidate_observations
   get_observations_heathrow -> consolidate_observations
   get_observations_shetland -> consolidate_observations

   hidden [style="invis"]
   get_observations_aldergrove -> hidden [style="invis"]
   get_observations_camborne -> hidden [style="invis"]
   hidden -> consolidate_observations [style="invis"]

.. ifnotslides::

   We will also use the UK radar network to get rainfall data with a task
   called ``get_rainfall``.

   We will fetch rainfall data **every six hours starting six hours after the
   initial cycle point**.

2. Running computer models to generate forecast data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   We will do this with a task called ``forecast`` which will run
   **every six hours starting six hours after the initial cycle point**.
   The ``forecast`` task will be dependent on:

   * The ``consolidate_observations`` task from the previous two cycles as well
     as from the present cycle.
   * The ``get_rainfall`` task from the present cycle.

.. digraph:: example
   :align: center

   size = "7,4"

   subgraph cluster_T00 {
       label="+PT0H"
       style="dashed"
       "observations.t00" [label="consolidate observations\n+PT0H"]
   }

   subgraph cluster_T03 {
       label="+PT3H"
       style="dashed"
       "observations.t03" [label="consolidate observations\n+PT3H"]
   }

   subgraph cluster_T06 {
       label="+PT6H"
       style="dashed"
       "forecast.t06" [label="forecast\n+PT6H"]
       "get_rainfall.t06" [label="get_rainfall\n+PT6H"]
       "observations.t06" [label="consolidate observations\n+PT6H"]
   }

   "observations.t00" -> "forecast.t06"
   "observations.t03" -> "forecast.t06"
   "observations.t06" -> "forecast.t06"
   "get_rainfall.t06" -> "forecast.t06"

3. Processing the data output to produce user-friendly forecasts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   This will be done with a task called ``post_process_<location>`` where
   ``location`` is the place we want to generate the forecast for. For
   the moment we will use Exeter.

   The ``post_process_exeter`` task will run **every six hours starting six
   hours after the initial cycle point** and will be dependent on the
   ``forecast`` task.

.. digraph:: example
   :align: center

   size = "2.5,2"

   "forecast" -> "post_process_exeter"

.. nextslide::

.. ifslides::

   .. rubric:: Next Steps

   1. Read through the "Putting It All Together" section.
   2. Complete the practical.

   Next section: :ref:`tutorial-cylc-further-scheduling`


.. _datetime cycling practical:

.. practical::

   .. rubric:: In this practical we will create a dummy forecasting workflow
      using date-time cycling.

   #. **Create A New Workflow.**

      Within your ``~/cylc-src`` directory create a new directory called
      ``datetime-cycling`` and move into it:

      .. code-block:: bash

         mkdir ~/cylc-src/datetime-cycling
         cd ~/cylc-src/datetime-cycling

      Create a :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` file and paste the following code into it:

      .. code-block:: cylc

         [scheduler]
             UTC mode = True
             allow implicit tasks = True
         [scheduling]
             initial cycle point = 20000101T00Z
             [[graph]]

   #. **Add The Recurrences.**

      The weather-forecasting workflow will require two
      recurrences. Add sections under the ``graph`` section for these,
      based on the information given above.

      .. hint::

         See :ref:`Date-Time Recurrences<tutorial-cylc-datetime-offset-icp>`.

      .. spoiler:: Solution warning

         The two recurrences you need are

         * ``PT3H``: repeat every three hours starting from the initial cycle
           point.
         * ``+PT6H/PT6H``: repeat every six hours starting six hours after the
           initial cycle point.

         .. code-block:: diff

             [scheduler]
                 UTC mode = True
                 allow implicit tasks = True
             [scheduling]
                 initial cycle point = 20000101T00Z
                 [[graph]]
            +        PT3H =
            +        +PT6H/PT6H =

   #. **Write The Graphing.**

      With the help of the graphs and the information above add dependencies to
      your workflow to implement the weather-forecasting workflow.

      You will need to consider the inter-cycle dependencies between tasks.

      Use ``cylc graph`` to inspect your work.

      .. spoiler:: Hint hint

         The dependencies you will need to formulate are as follows:

         * The ``consolidate_observations`` task is dependent on the
           ``get_observations_<site>`` tasks.
         * The ``forecast`` task is dependent on:

           * the ``get_rainfall`` task;
           * the ``consolidate_observations`` tasks from:

             * the same cycle;
             * the cycle 3 hours before (``-PT3H``);
             * the cycle 6 hours before (``-PT6H``).

         * The ``post_process_exeter`` task is dependent on the ``forecast``
           task.

         To launch ``cylc graph`` run the command:

         .. code-block:: sub

            cylc graph <path/to/flow.cylc>

      .. spoiler:: Solution warning

         .. code-block:: cylc

           [scheduler]
               UTC mode = True
               allow implicit tasks = True
           [scheduling]
               initial cycle point = 20000101T00Z
               [[graph]]
                   PT3H = """
                       get_observations_aldergrove => consolidate_observations
                       get_observations_camborne => consolidate_observations
                       get_observations_heathrow => consolidate_observations
                       get_observations_shetland => consolidate_observations
                   """
                   +PT6H/PT6H = """
                       consolidate_observations => forecast
                       consolidate_observations[-PT3H] => forecast
                       consolidate_observations[-PT6H] => forecast
                       get_rainfall => forecast => post_process_exeter
                   """

   #. **Inter-Cycle Offsets.**

      To ensure the ``forecast`` tasks for different cycles run in order the
      ``forecast`` task will also need to be dependent on the previous run
      of ``forecast``.

      .. digraph:: example
         :align: center

         size = "4,1.5"
         rankdir=LR

         subgraph cluster_T06 {
             label="T06"
             style="dashed"
             "forecast.t06" [label="forecast\nT06"]
         }

         subgraph cluster_T12 {
             label="T12"
             style="dashed"
             "forecast.t12" [label="forecast\nT12"]
         }

         subgraph cluster_T18 {
             label="T18"
             style="dashed"
             "forecast.t18" [label="forecast\nT18"]
         }

         "forecast.t06" -> "forecast.t12" -> "forecast.t18"

      We can express this dependency as ``forecast[-PT6H] => forecast``.

      Try adding this line to your workflow then visualising it with ``cylc
      graph``.

      .. hint::

         Try adjusting the number of cycles displayed by ``cylc graph``:

         .. code-block:: console

            $ cylc graph . 2000 20000101T12Z &

      You will notice that there is a dependency which looks like this:

      .. digraph:: example
        :align: center

         size = "4,1"
         rankdir=LR

         "forecast.t00" [label="forecast\n20000101T0000Z"
                         color="#888888"
                         fontcolor="#888888"]
         "forecast.t06" [label="forecast\n20000101T0600Z"]


         "forecast.t00" -> "forecast.t06"

      Note in particular that the ``forecast`` task in the 00:00 cycle is
      grey. The reason for this is that this task does not exist. Remember
      the forecast task runs every six hours
      **starting 6 hours after the initial cycle point**, so the
      dependency is only valid from 12:00 onwards. To fix the problem we
      must add a new dependency section which repeats every six hours
      **starting 12 hours after the initial cycle point**.

      Make the following changes to your workflow and the grey task should
      disappear:

      .. code-block:: diff

                    +PT6H/PT6H = """
                        ...
         -              forecast[-PT6H] => forecast
                    """
         +          +PT12H/PT6H = """
         +              forecast[-PT6H] => forecast
         +          """

Commit message:

Restore tutorial sections, with warnings; plus other tweaks.

src/tutorial/scheduling/datetime-cycling.rst, after:

.. _nowcasting: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nowcasting_(meteorology)

.. _tutorial-datetime-cycling:

Date-Time Cycling
=================

.. warning::

   This section of the tutorial still contains screenshots of the obsolete Cylc 7
   desktop GUI.


In the last section we looked at writing an :term:`integer cycling` workflow,
one where the :term:`cycle points <cycle point>` are numbered.

.. ifnotslides::

   Typically workflows are repeated at a regular time interval, say every day
   or every few hours. To make this easier Cylc has a date-time cycling mode
   where the :term:`cycle points <cycle point>` use date and time specifications
   rather than numbers.

.. admonition:: Reminder
   :class: tip

   :term:`Cycle points <cycle point>` are labels. Cylc runs tasks as soon as
   their dependencies are met so cycles do not necessarily run in order.


.. _tutorial-iso8601:

ISO8601
-------

In Cylc, dates, times and durations are written using the :term:`ISO8601` format
- an international standard for representing dates and times.

.. _tutorial-iso8601-datetimes:

ISO8601 Date-Times
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   In ISO8601, datetimes are written from the largest unit to the smallest
   (i.e: year, month, day, hour, minute, second in succession) with the ``T``
   character separating the date and time components. For example, midnight
   on the 1st of January 2000 is written ``20000101T000000``.

   For brevity we may omit seconds (and minutes) from the time i.e:
   ``20000101T0000`` (``20000101T00``).

   For reability we can add hyphens (``-``) between the date components
   and colons (``:``) between the time components.
   This is optional, but if you do this you must use both hyphens *and* colons.

   Time-zone information can be added onto the end. UTC is written ``Z``,
   UTC+1 is written ``+01``, etc. E.G: ``2000-01-01T00:00Z``.

.. Diagram of an iso8601 datetime's components.

.. image:: ../img/iso8601-dates.svg
   :width: 75%
   :align: center

.. _tutorial-iso8601-durations:

ISO8601 Durations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   In ISO8601, durations are prefixed with a ``P`` (for "period") and are
   written with a character following each unit:

* ``Y`` for year.
* ``M`` for month.
* ``D`` for day.
* ``W`` for week.
* ``H`` for hour.
* ``M`` for minute.
* ``S`` for second.

.. nextslide::

.. ifnotslides::

   As with datetimes the components are written in order from largest to
   smallest and the date and time components are separated by the ``T``
   character. E.G:

* ``P1D``: one day.
* ``PT1H``: one hour.
* ``P1DT1H``: one day and one hour.
* ``PT1H30M``: one and a half hours.
* ``P1Y1M1DT1H1M1S``: a year and a month and a day and an hour and a
  minute and a second.


Date-Time Recurrences
---------------------

In :term:`integer cycling`, workflows' recurrences are written ``P1``, ``P2``,
etc.

In :term:`date-time cycling <datetime cycling>` there are two ways to write
recurrences:

1. Using ISO8601 durations (e.g. ``P1D``, ``PT1H``).
2. Using ISO8601 date-times with inferred recurrence.

.. _tutorial-inferred-recurrence:

Inferred Recurrence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   A recurrence can be inferred from a date-time by omitting digits from the
   front. For example, if the year is omitted then the recurrence can be
   inferred to be annual. E.G:

.. code-block:: sub

   2000-01-01T00   # Datetime - midnight on the 1st of January 2000.

        01-01T00   # Every year on the 1st of January.
           01T00   # Every month on the first of the month.
             T00   # Every day at midnight.
             T-00  # Every hour at zero minutes past (every hour on the hour).

.. note::

   To omit hours from a date time we must place a ``-`` after the
   ``T`` character.

Recurrence Formats
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   As with integer cycling, recurrences start, by default, at the
   :term:`initial cycle point`. We can override this in one of two ways:

1. By defining an arbitrary cycle point (``datetime/recurrence``):

   * ``2000/P4Y``: every fourth year starting with the year 2000.
   * ``2000-01-01T00/T00``: every day at midnight starting on the 1st of January
     2000
   * ``2000-01-01T12/T00``: every day at midnight starting on the first midnight
     after the 1st of January at 12:00 (i.e. ``2000-01-02T00``).

.. nextslide::

.. _tutorial-cylc-datetime-offset-icp:

2. By defining an offset from the initial cycle point (``offset/recurrence``).
   This offset is an ISO8601 duration preceded by a plus character:

   * ``+P1Y/P1Y``: every year starting one year after the initial cycle point.
   * ``+PT1H/T00``: every day starting on the first midnight after the point one
     hour after the initial cycle point.

Durations And The Initial Cycle Point
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using durations, beware that a change in the initial cycle point
might produce different results for the recurrences.

.. nextslide::

.. list-table::
   :class: grid-table

   * - .. code-block:: cylc
          :emphasize-lines: 2

          [scheduling]
              initial cycle point = 2000-01-01T00
              [[graph]]
                  P1D = foo[-P1D] => foo

     - .. code-block:: cylc
          :emphasize-lines: 2

          [scheduling]
              initial cycle point = 2000-01-01T12
              [[graph]]
                  P1D = foo[-P1D] => foo

   * - .. digraph:: Example
          :align: center

          size = "3,3"

          "foo.1" [label="foo\n2000-01-01T00"]
          "foo.2" [label="foo\n2000-01-02T00"]
          "foo.3" [label="foo\n2000-01-03T00"]

          "foo.1" -> "foo.2" -> "foo.3"

     - .. digraph:: Example
          :align: center

          size = "3,3"

          "foo.1" [label="foo\n2000-01-01T12"]
          "foo.2" [label="foo\n2000-01-02T12"]
          "foo.3" [label="foo\n2000-01-03T12"]

          "foo.1" -> "foo.2" -> "foo.3"

.. nextslide::

We could write the recurrence "every midnight" independent from the initial
cycle point by:

* Use an `inferred recurrence`_ instead (i.e. ``T00``).
* Overriding the recurrence start point (i.e. ``T00/P1D``)
* Using the ``[scheduling]initial cycle point constraints`` setting to
  constrain the initial cycle point (e.g. to a particular time of day). See
  the `Cylc User Guide`_ for details.

The Initial & Final Cycle Points
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   There are two special recurrences for the initial and final cycle points:

* ``R1``: repeat once at the initial cycle point.
* ``R1/P0Y``: repeat once at the final cycle point.

.. TODO - change terminology as done in the cylc user guide, "repeat" can be
   confusing. Use occur?

Inter-Cycle Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   Inter-cycle dependencies are written as ISO8601 durations, e.g:

* ``foo[-P1D]``: the task ``foo`` from the cycle one day before.
* ``bar[-PT1H30M]``: the task ``bar`` from the cycle 1 hour 30 minutes before.

.. ifnotslides::

   The initial cycle point can be referenced using a caret character ``^``, e.g:

* ``baz[^]``: the task ``baz`` from the initial cycle point.


.. _tutorial-cylc-datetime-utc:

UTC Mode
--------

.. ifnotslides::

   Due to all of the difficulties caused by time zones, particularly with
   respect to daylight savings, we typically use UTC (that's the ``+00`` time
   zone) in Cylc workflows.

   When a workflow uses UTC all of the cycle points will be written in the
   ``+00`` time zone.

   To make your workflow use UTC set the ``[scheduler]UTC mode`` setting to ``True``,
   i.e:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       UTC mode = True


.. _tutorial-datetime-cycling-practical:

Putting It All Together
-----------------------

.. ifslides::

   We will now develop a simple weather forecasting workflow.

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc was originally developed for running operational weather forecasting. In
   this section we will outline a basic (dummy) weather-forecasting workflow and
   explain how to implement it in cylc.

   .. note::

      Technically the workflow outlined in this section is a `nowcasting`_ workflow.
      We will refer to it as forecasting for simplicity.

   A basic weather-forecasting workflow consists of three main steps:

1. Gathering Observations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   We gather observations from different weather stations and use them to
   build a picture of the current weather. Our dummy weather forecast
   will get wind observations from four weather stations:

   * Aldergrove
   * Camborne
   * Heathrow
   * Shetland

   The tasks which retrieve observation data will be called
   ``get_observations_<site>`` where ``site`` is the name of the weather
   station in question.

   Next we need to consolidate these observations so that our forecasting
   system can work with them. To do this we have a
   ``consolidate_observations`` task.

   We will fetch wind observations **every three hours starting from the initial
   cycle point**.

   The ``consolidate_observations`` task must run after the
   ``get_observations<site>`` tasks.

.. digraph:: example
   :align: center

   size = "7,4"

   get_observations_aldergrove -> consolidate_observations
   get_observations_camborne -> consolidate_observations
   get_observations_heathrow -> consolidate_observations
   get_observations_shetland -> consolidate_observations

   hidden [style="invis"]
   get_observations_aldergrove -> hidden [style="invis"]
   get_observations_camborne -> hidden [style="invis"]
   hidden -> consolidate_observations [style="invis"]

.. ifnotslides::

   We will also use the UK radar network to get rainfall data with a task
   called ``get_rainfall``.

   We will fetch rainfall data **every six hours starting six hours after the
   initial cycle point**.

2. Running computer models to generate forecast data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   We will do this with a task called ``forecast`` which will run
   **every six hours starting six hours after the initial cycle point**.
   The ``forecast`` task will be dependent on:

   * The ``consolidate_observations`` task from the previous two cycles as well
     as from the present cycle.
   * The ``get_rainfall`` task from the present cycle.

.. digraph:: example
   :align: center

   size = "7,4"

   subgraph cluster_T00 {
       label="+PT0H"
       style="dashed"
       "observations.t00" [label="consolidate observations\n+PT0H"]
   }

   subgraph cluster_T03 {
       label="+PT3H"
       style="dashed"
       "observations.t03" [label="consolidate observations\n+PT3H"]
   }

   subgraph cluster_T06 {
       label="+PT6H"
       style="dashed"
       "forecast.t06" [label="forecast\n+PT6H"]
       "get_rainfall.t06" [label="get_rainfall\n+PT6H"]
       "observations.t06" [label="consolidate observations\n+PT6H"]
   }

   "observations.t00" -> "forecast.t06"
   "observations.t03" -> "forecast.t06"
   "observations.t06" -> "forecast.t06"
   "get_rainfall.t06" -> "forecast.t06"

3. Processing the data output to produce user-friendly forecasts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   This will be done with a task called ``post_process_<location>`` where
   ``location`` is the place we want to generate the forecast for. For
   the moment we will use Exeter.

   The ``post_process_exeter`` task will run **every six hours starting six
   hours after the initial cycle point** and will be dependent on the
   ``forecast`` task.

.. digraph:: example
   :align: center

   size = "2.5,2"

   "forecast" -> "post_process_exeter"

.. nextslide::

.. ifslides::

   .. rubric:: Next Steps

   1. Read through the "Putting It All Together" section.
   2. Complete the practical.

   Next section: :ref:`tutorial-cylc-further-scheduling`


.. _datetime cycling practical:

.. practical::

   .. rubric:: In this practical we will create a dummy forecasting workflow
      using date-time cycling.

   #. **Create A New Workflow.**

      Within your ``~/cylc-src`` directory create a new directory called
      ``datetime-cycling`` and move into it:

      .. code-block:: bash

         mkdir ~/cylc-src/datetime-cycling
         cd ~/cylc-src/datetime-cycling

      Create a :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` file and paste the following code into it:

      .. code-block:: cylc

         [scheduler]
             UTC mode = True
             allow implicit tasks = True
         [scheduling]
             initial cycle point = 20000101T00Z
             [[graph]]

   #. **Add The Recurrences.**

      The weather-forecasting workflow will require two
      recurrences. Add sections under the ``graph`` section for these,
      based on the information given above.

      .. hint::

         See :ref:`Date-Time Recurrences<tutorial-cylc-datetime-offset-icp>`.

      .. spoiler:: Solution warning

         The two recurrences you need are

         * ``PT3H``: repeat every three hours starting from the initial cycle
           point.
         * ``+PT6H/PT6H``: repeat every six hours starting six hours after the
           initial cycle point.

         .. code-block:: diff

             [scheduler]
                 UTC mode = True
                 allow implicit tasks = True
             [scheduling]
                 initial cycle point = 20000101T00Z
                 [[graph]]
            +        PT3H =
            +        +PT6H/PT6H =

   #. **Write The Graphing.**

      With the help of the graphs and the information above add dependencies to
      your workflow to implement the weather-forecasting workflow.

      You will need to consider the inter-cycle dependencies between tasks.

      Use ``cylc graph`` to inspect your work.

      .. spoiler:: Hint hint

         The dependencies you will need to formulate are as follows:

         * The ``consolidate_observations`` task is dependent on the
           ``get_observations_<site>`` tasks.
         * The ``forecast`` task is dependent on:

           * the ``get_rainfall`` task;
           * the ``consolidate_observations`` tasks from:

             * the same cycle;
             * the cycle 3 hours before (``-PT3H``);
             * the cycle 6 hours before (``-PT6H``).

         * The ``post_process_exeter`` task is dependent on the ``forecast``
           task.

         To launch ``cylc graph`` run the command:

         .. code-block:: sub

            cylc graph <path/to/flow.cylc>

      .. spoiler:: Solution warning

         .. code-block:: cylc

           [scheduler]
               UTC mode = True
               allow implicit tasks = True
           [scheduling]
               initial cycle point = 20000101T00Z
               [[graph]]
                   PT3H = """
                       get_observations_aldergrove => consolidate_observations
                       get_observations_camborne => consolidate_observations
                       get_observations_heathrow => consolidate_observations
                       get_observations_shetland => consolidate_observations
                   """
                   +PT6H/PT6H = """
                       consolidate_observations => forecast
                       consolidate_observations[-PT3H] => forecast
                       consolidate_observations[-PT6H] => forecast
                       get_rainfall => forecast => post_process_exeter
                   """

   #. **Inter-Cycle Offsets.**

      To ensure the ``forecast`` tasks for different cycles run in order the
      ``forecast`` task will also need to be dependent on the previous run
      of ``forecast``.

      .. digraph:: example
         :align: center

         size = "4,1.5"
         rankdir=LR

         subgraph cluster_T06 {
             label="T06"
             style="dashed"
             "forecast.t06" [label="forecast\nT06"]
         }

         subgraph cluster_T12 {
             label="T12"
             style="dashed"
             "forecast.t12" [label="forecast\nT12"]
         }

         subgraph cluster_T18 {
             label="T18"
             style="dashed"
             "forecast.t18" [label="forecast\nT18"]
         }

         "forecast.t06" -> "forecast.t12" -> "forecast.t18"

      We can express this dependency as ``forecast[-PT6H] => forecast``.

      Try adding this line to your workflow then visualising it with ``cylc
      graph``.

      .. hint::

         Try adjusting the number of cycles displayed by ``cylc graph``:

         .. code-block:: console

            $ cylc graph . 2000 20000101T12Z &

      You will notice that there is a dependency which looks like this:

      .. digraph:: example
        :align: center

         size = "4,1"
         rankdir=LR

         "forecast.t00" [label="forecast\n20000101T0000Z"
                         color="#888888"
                         fontcolor="#888888"]
         "forecast.t06" [label="forecast\n20000101T0600Z"]


         "forecast.t00" -> "forecast.t06"

      Note in particular that the ``forecast`` task in the 00:00 cycle is
      grey. The reason for this is that this task does not exist. Remember
      the forecast task runs every six hours
      **starting 6 hours after the initial cycle point**, so the
      dependency is only valid from 12:00 onwards. To fix the problem we
      must add a new dependency section which repeats every six hours
      **starting 12 hours after the initial cycle point**.

      Make the following changes to your workflow and the grey task should
      disappear:

      .. code-block:: diff

                    +PT6H/PT6H = """
                        ...
         -              forecast[-PT6H] => forecast
                    """
         +          +PT12H/PT6H = """
         +              forecast[-PT6H] => forecast
         +          """
