src/user-guide/writing-workflows/parameterized-tasks.rst, before:

.. _User Guide Param:

Task Parameters
===============

Cylc can automatically generate related tasks and dependencies by expanding
:term:`parameterized <parameterization>` names over lists or ranges of
values. Uses for this include:

- Generating an ensemble of similar model runs
- Generating chains of tasks to process similar datasets
- Replicating an entire workflow, or part thereof, over several runs
- Splitting a long model run into smaller chunks
- Parameterized cycling

.. note::

   Cylc supports use of :ref:`Jinja2 <User Guide Jinja2>` and :ref:`Empy
   <User Guide Empy>` templating for programmatic generation of workflow
   configurations. The built-in parameterization system described here
   is a cleaner and easier alternative *for generating tasks and families
   over a range of parameters*, but unlike general templating it can only be
   used for that specific purpose.


Parameter Expansion
-------------------

Parameter values can be lists of strings, or lists of integers and
integer ranges (with inclusive bounds). Numeric values in a list of strings are
considered strings. It is not possible to mix strings with integer ranges.

For example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       # parameters: "ship", "buoy", "plane"
       # default task suffixes: _ship, _buoy, _plane
       obs = ship, buoy, plane

       # parameters: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
       # default task suffixes: _run1, _run2, _run3, _run4, _run5
       run = 1..5

       # parameters: 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
       # default task suffixes: _idx1, _idx3, _idx5, _idx7, _idx9
       idx = 1..9..2

       # parameters: -11, -1, 9
       # default task suffixes: _idx-11, _idx-01, _idx+09
       idx = -11..9..10

       # parameters: 1, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13
       # default task suffixes: _i01, _i03, _i05, _i10, _i11, _i12, _i13
       i = 1..5..2, 10, 11..13

       # parameters: "0", "1", "e", "pi", "i"
       # default task suffixes: _0, _1, _e, _pi, _i
       item = 0, 1, e, pi, i

       # ERROR: mix strings with int range
       p = one, two, 3..5

Then angle brackets denote use of these parameters throughout the workflow
configuration. For the values above, this parameterized name:

.. code-block:: sub

   model<run>  # for run = 1..5

expands to these concrete task names:

.. code-block:: none

   model_run1, model_run2, model_run3, model_run4, model_run5

and this parameterized name:

.. code-block:: sub

   proc<obs>  # for obs = ship, buoy, plane

expands to these concrete task names:

.. code-block:: none

   proc_ship, proc_buoy, proc_plane

By default, to avoid any ambiguity, the parameter name appears in the expanded
task names for integer values, but not for string values. For example,
``model_run1`` for ``run = 1``, but ``proc_ship`` for
``obs = ship``. However, the default expansion templates can be
overridden if need be:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       obs = ship, buoy, plane
       run = 1..5
       [[templates]]
           run = -R%(run)s  # Make foo<run> expand to foo-R1 etc.

See :cylc:conf:`[task parameters][templates]` for more on the string
template syntax.

Any number of parameters can be used at once. This parameterization:

.. code-block:: sub

   model<run,obs>  # for run = 1..2 and obs = ship, buoy, plane

expands to these tasks names:

.. code-block:: none

   model_run1_ship, model_run1_buoy, model_run1_plane,
   model_run2_ship, model_run2_buoy, model_run2_plane

Here's a simple but complete example workflow:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           run = 1..2
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = "prep => model<run>"
   [runtime]
       [[model<run>]]
           # ...

The result, post parameter expansion, is this:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = "prep => model_run1 & model_run2"
   [runtime]
       [[model_run1]]
           # ...
       [[model_run2]]
           # ...

Here's a more complex graph using two parameters (:cylc:conf:`[runtime]`
omitted):

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           run = 1..2
           mem = cat, dog
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               prep => init<run> => model<run,mem> =>
               post<run,mem> => wrap<run> => done
           """

.. todo

   \.\.\. which expands to:

   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               prep => init_run1 => model_run1_cat => post_run1_cat => wrap_run1 => done
                   init_run1 => model_run1_dog => post_run2_dog => wrap_run1
               prep => init_run2 => model_run2_cat => post_run2_cat => wrap_run2 => done
                   init_run2 => model_run2_dog => post_run2_dog => wrap_run2"""

The result as visualized by ``cylc graph`` is:

.. _fig-params-1:

.. figure:: ../../img/params1.png
   :align: center

   Parameter expansion example.


Zero-Padded Integer Values
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Integer parameter values are given a default template for generating task
suffixes that are zero-padded according to the longest size of their values.
For example, the default template for ``p = 9..10`` would be
``_p%(p)02d``, so that ``foo<p>`` would become ``foo_p09, foo_p10``.
If negative values are present in the parameter list, the
default template will include the sign.
For example, the default template for ``p = -1..1`` would be
``_p%(p)+02d``, so that ``foo<p>`` would become
``foo_p-1, foo_p+0, foo_p+1``.

To get thicker padding and/or alternate suffixes, use a template. E.g.:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       i = 1..9
       p = 3..14
       [[templates]]
           i = _i%(i)02d  # suffixes = _i01, _i02, ..., _i09
           # A double-percent gives a literal percent character
           p = %%p%(p)03d  # suffixes = %p003, %p004, ..., %p013, %p014


Parameters as Full Task Names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Parameter values can be used as full task names, but the default template
should be overridden to remove the initial underscore. For example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       i = 1..4
       obs = ship, buoy, plane
       [[templates]]
           i = i%(i)d  # task name must begin with an alphabet
           obs = %(obs)s
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               foo => <i>  # foo => i1 & i2 & i3 & i4
               <obs> => bar  # ship & buoy & plane => bar
           """


Passing Values To Tasks
-----------------------

Parameter values are passed as environment variables to tasks generated by
parameter expansion. For example, if we have:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           obs = ship, buoy, plane
           run = 1..5
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = model<run,obs>

Then task ``model_run2_ship`` would get the following standard
environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

   # In a job script of an instance of the "model_run2_ship" task:
   export CYLC_TASK_PARAM_run="2"
   export CYLC_TASK_PARAM_obs="ship"

These variables allow tasks to determine which member of a parameterized
group they are, and so to vary their behaviour accordingly.

You can also define custom variables and string templates for parameter value
substitution. For example, if we add this to the above configuration:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[model<run,obs>]]
           [[[environment]]]
               MYNAME = %(obs)sy-mc%(obs)sface
               MYFILE = /path/to/run%(run)03d/%(obs)s

Then task ``model_run2_ship`` would get the following custom
environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

   # In a job script of an instance of the "model_run2_ship" task:
   export MYNAME=shipy-mcshipface
   export MYFILE=/path/to/run002/ship


Selecting Specific Values
-------------------------

Specific parameter values can be singled out in the graph and under
:cylc:conf:`[runtime]` with the notation ``<p=5>`` (for example).
Here's how to make a special task trigger off just the first of a
set of model runs:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           run = 1..5
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               model<run> => post_proc<run>  # general case
               model<run=1> => check_first_run  # special case
            """
   [runtime]
       [[model<run>]]
           # config for all "model" runs...
       [[model<run=1>]]
           # special config (if any) for the first model run...
       #...


Selecting Partial Ranges
------------------------

The parameter notation does not currently support partial range selection such
as ``foo<p=5..10>``, but you can achieve the same result by defining a
second parameter that covers the partial range and giving it the same expansion
template as the full-range parameter. For example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       run = 1..10  # 1, 2, ..., 10
       runx = 1..3  # 1, 2, 3
       [[parameter templates]]
           run = _R%(run)02d   # _R01, _R02, ..., _R10
           runx = _R%(runx)02d  # _R01, _R02, _R03
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """model<run> => post<run>
                   model<runx> => checkx<runx>"""
   [runtime]
       [[model<run>]]
           # ...
       #...


Offsets in the Graph
---------------------

A negative offset notation ``<NAME-1>`` is interpreted as the previous
value in the ordered list of parameter values, while a positive offset is
interpreted as the next value. For example, to split a model run into multiple
steps with each step depending on the previous one, either of these graph lines:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   model<run-1> => model<run>  # for run = 1, 2, 3
   model<run> => model<run+1>  # for run = 1, 2, 3

expands to:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   model_run1 => model_run2
   model_run2 => model_run3

   # or equivalently:

   model_run1 => model_run2 => model_run3

And this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   proc<size-1> => proc<size>  # for size = small, big, huge

expands to:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   proc_small => proc_big
   proc_big => proc_huge

   # or equivalently:

   proc_small => proc_big => proc_huge


Task Families and Parameters
----------------------------

Task family members can be generated by parameter expansion:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[FAM]]
       [[member<r>]]
           inherit = FAM
   # Result: family FAM contains member_r1, member_r2, etc.


Family names can be parameterized too, just like task names:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[RUN<r>]]
       [[model<r>]]
           inherit = RUN<r>
       [[post_proc<r>]]
           inherit = RUN<r>
   # Result: family RUN_r1 contains model_r1 and post_proc_r1,
   #         family RUN_r2 contains model_r2 and post_proc_r1, etc.

As described in :ref:`FamilyTriggers` family names can be used to
trigger all members at once:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   foo => FAMILY

or to trigger off all members:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   FAMILY:succeed-all => bar

or to trigger off any members:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   FAMILY:succeed-any => bar

If the members of ``FAMILY`` were generated with parameters, you can
also trigger them all at once with parameter notation:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   foo => member<m>

Similarly, to trigger off all members:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   member<m> => bar
   # (member<m>:fail etc., for other trigger types)

Family names are still needed in the graph, however, to succinctly express
"succeed-any" triggering semantics, and all-to-all or any-to-all triggering:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   FAM1:succeed-any => FAM2

(Direct all-to-all and any-to-all family triggering is not recommended for
efficiency reasons though - see :ref:`EfficientInterFamilyTriggering`).

For family *member-to-member* triggering use parameterized members.
For example, if family ``OBS_GET`` has members ``get<obs>`` and
family ``OBS_PROC`` has members ``proc<obs>`` then this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   get<obs> => proc<obs>  # for obs = ship, buoy, plane

expands to:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   get_ship => proc_ship
   get_buoy => proc_buoy
   get_plane => proc_plane


.. _Parameterized Cycling:

Parameterized Cycling
---------------------

For smaller workflows of finite duration, parameter expansion can be used to
generate a sequence of pre-defined tasks as a proxy for cycling.

Here's a cycling workflow of two-monthly model runs for one year, with
previous-instance model dependence:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       final cycle point = 2020-12
       [[graph]]
           # Run once, at the initial point.
           R1 = "prep => model"
           # Run at 2-month intervals between the initial and final points.
           P2M = "model[-P2M] => model => post_proc & archive"
   [runtime]
       [[model]]
           script = "run-model $CYLC_TASK_CYCLE_POINT"


And here's how to do the same thing with parameterized tasks instead of cycling:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       chunk = 1..6
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               prep => model<chunk=1>
               model<chunk-1> => model<chunk> =>
               post_proc<chunk> & archive<chunk>
            """
   [runtime]
       [[model<chunk>]]
           script = """
               # Compute start date from chunk index and interval.
               INITIAL_POINT=2020-01
               INTERVAL_MONTHS=2
               OFFSET_MONTHS=(( (CYLC_TASK_PARAM_chunk - 1)*INTERVAL_MONTHS ))
               OFFSET=P${OFFSET_MONTHS}M  # e.g. P4M for chunk=3
               # Run the model.
               run-model $(cylc cyclepoint --offset=$OFFSET $INITIAL_POINT)
           """

The two workflows achieve the same result, and both can include special
behaviour at the start, end, or anywhere in between.

.. todo
   Create sub-figures if possible: for now hacked as separate figures with
   link and caption on final displayed figure.

.. figure:: ../../img/eg2-static.png
   :align: center

.. _fig-eg2:

.. figure:: ../../img/eg2-dynamic.png
   :align: center

   Parameterized (top) and cycling (bottom) versions of the same
   workflow. The first three cycle points are shown in the
   cycling case. The parameterized case does not have cycle points (technically
   all of its tasks have the cycle point 1).

The parameterized version has several disadvantages, however:

  - The workflow must be finite in extent and not too large because every
    parameterized task generates a new task definition

    - (In a cycling workflow a single task definition acts as a template for
      all cycle point instances of a task)
  - Datetime arithmetic has to be done manually

    - (This doesn't apply if it's not a datetime sequence; parameterized
      integer cycling is straightforward.)


Parameterized Sub-Cycles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A workflow can have multiple main cycling sequences, but sub-cycles within each
main cycle point have to be parameterized. A typical use case for this is
incremental processing of files generated sequentially during a long model run.

Here's a workflow that uses parameters to split a long model run in each
datetime cycle point into four smaller runs:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       chunk = 1..4
   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       [[graph]]
           P1Y = """
               model<chunk-1> => model<chunk>
               model<chunk=4>[-P1Y] => model<chunk=1>
           """

The intercycle trigger connects the first chunk in each cycle point to the
last chunk in the previous cycle point. However, in this particular case it
might be simpler to use a 3-monthly datetime cycle instead:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       [[graph]]
           P3M = "model[-P3M] => model"


For another example, here task ``model`` generates 10 files in sequence as it
runs. Task ``proc_file0`` triggers when the model starts running, to wait for
and process the first file; when that is done, ``proc_file1`` triggers to wait
for the second file; and so on.

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       file = 0..9
   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       [[graph]]
           P1Y = """
               model:start => proc<file=0>
               proc<file-1> => proc<file>
               proc<file=9> => upload_products
           """
   [runtime]
       [[proc<file>]]
       # ...


Offsets at Sequence Start
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In cycling workflows, dependence on tasks prior to the start cycle point is
ignored [1]_. So this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc

   P1D = "model[-P1D] => model"

simplifies at the initial cycle point to this:

.. code-block:: cylc

   P1D = "model"

(Note this is a convenient way to bootstrap into an infinite cycle, but special
behaviour at the start point can be configured explicitly if desired).

Similarly, parameter offsets that go out of range are ignored. So this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc

   # for chunk = 1..4
   R1 = "model<chunk-1> => model<chunk>"

simplifies for ``chunk=1`` to this:

.. code-block:: cylc

   R1 = "model_chunk0"


.. [1] Currently this only applies to the unique workflow start cycle point, so
       it may be easier to use parameterized cycling if you have multiple
       (finite) sequences starting at different points. We plan to extend this
       convenience to all sequences regardless of start point, but use will be
       optional because delayed-start cycling tasks may need to trigger off of
       earlier cycles.

Commit message:

added documentation for <param><param2> syntax

src/user-guide/writing-workflows/parameterized-tasks.rst, after:

.. _User Guide Param:

Task Parameters
===============

Cylc can automatically generate related tasks and dependencies by expanding
:term:`parameterized <parameterization>` names over lists or ranges of
values. Uses for this include:

- Generating an ensemble of similar model runs
- Generating chains of tasks to process similar datasets
- Replicating an entire workflow, or part thereof, over several runs
- Splitting a long model run into smaller chunks
- Parameterized cycling

.. note::

   Cylc supports use of :ref:`Jinja2 <User Guide Jinja2>` and :ref:`Empy
   <User Guide Empy>` templating for programmatic generation of workflow
   configurations. The built-in parameterization system described here
   is a cleaner and easier alternative *for generating tasks and families
   over a range of parameters*, but unlike general templating it can only be
   used for that specific purpose.


Parameter Expansion
-------------------

Parameter values can be lists of strings, or lists of integers and
integer ranges (with inclusive bounds). Numeric values in a list of strings are
considered strings. It is not possible to mix strings with integer ranges.

For example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       # parameters: "ship", "buoy", "plane"
       # default task suffixes: _ship, _buoy, _plane
       obs = ship, buoy, plane

       # parameters: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
       # default task suffixes: _run1, _run2, _run3, _run4, _run5
       run = 1..5

       # parameters: 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
       # default task suffixes: _idx1, _idx3, _idx5, _idx7, _idx9
       idx = 1..9..2

       # parameters: -11, -1, 9
       # default task suffixes: _idx-11, _idx-01, _idx+09
       idx = -11..9..10

       # parameters: 1, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13
       # default task suffixes: _i01, _i03, _i05, _i10, _i11, _i12, _i13
       i = 1..5..2, 10, 11..13

       # parameters: "0", "1", "e", "pi", "i"
       # default task suffixes: _0, _1, _e, _pi, _i
       item = 0, 1, e, pi, i

       # ERROR: mix strings with int range
       p = one, two, 3..5

Then angle brackets denote use of these parameters throughout the workflow
configuration. For the values above, this parameterized name:

.. code-block:: sub

   model<run>  # for run = 1..5

expands to these concrete task names:

.. code-block:: none

   model_run1, model_run2, model_run3, model_run4, model_run5

and this parameterized name:

.. code-block:: sub

   proc<obs>  # for obs = ship, buoy, plane

expands to these concrete task names:

.. code-block:: none

   proc_ship, proc_buoy, proc_plane

By default, to avoid any ambiguity, the parameter name appears in the expanded
task names for integer values, but not for string values. For example,
``model_run1`` for ``run = 1``, but ``proc_ship`` for
``obs = ship``. However, the default expansion templates can be
overridden if need be:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       obs = ship, buoy, plane
       run = 1..5
       [[templates]]
           run = -R%(run)s  # Make foo<run> expand to foo-R1 etc.

See :cylc:conf:`[task parameters][templates]` for more on the string
template syntax.

Any number of parameters can be used at once. This parameterization:


.. code-block:: sub

   model<run,obs>  # for run = 1..2 and obs = ship, buoy, plane
   model<run><obs> # Alternatively, from Cylc 8.2.0

.. versionadded:: 8.2.0

   From this version you can also use the equivalent ``model<run><obs>``
   syntax. This allows more flexibility in templating: You can now construct
   names like ``beginning<run>middle<obs>end``.

.. note::

    Before Cylc 8.2.0 this syntax worked in many cases, but was
    not formally supported, and failed if used in the names of
    :ref:`task families<taskfamilies.parameters>`.

expands to these tasks names:

.. code-block:: none

   model_run1_ship, model_run1_buoy, model_run1_plane,
   model_run2_ship, model_run2_buoy, model_run2_plane

Here's a simple but complete example workflow:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           run = 1..2
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = "prep => model<run>"
   [runtime]
       [[model<run>]]
           # ...

The result, post parameter expansion, is this:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = "prep => model_run1 & model_run2"
   [runtime]
       [[model_run1]]
           # ...
       [[model_run2]]
           # ...

Here's a more complex graph using two parameters (:cylc:conf:`[runtime]`
omitted):

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           run = 1..2
           mem = cat, dog
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               prep => init<run> => model<run,mem> =>
               post<run,mem> => wrap<run> => done
           """

.. todo

   \.\.\. which expands to:

   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               prep => init_run1 => model_run1_cat => post_run1_cat => wrap_run1 => done
                   init_run1 => model_run1_dog => post_run2_dog => wrap_run1
               prep => init_run2 => model_run2_cat => post_run2_cat => wrap_run2 => done
                   init_run2 => model_run2_dog => post_run2_dog => wrap_run2"""

The result as visualized by ``cylc graph`` is:

.. _fig-params-1:

.. figure:: ../../img/params1.png
   :align: center

   Parameter expansion example.


Zero-Padded Integer Values
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Integer parameter values are given a default template for generating task
suffixes that are zero-padded according to the longest size of their values.
For example, the default template for ``p = 9..10`` would be
``_p%(p)02d``, so that ``foo<p>`` would become ``foo_p09, foo_p10``.
If negative values are present in the parameter list, the
default template will include the sign.
For example, the default template for ``p = -1..1`` would be
``_p%(p)+02d``, so that ``foo<p>`` would become
``foo_p-1, foo_p+0, foo_p+1``.

To get thicker padding and/or alternate suffixes, use a template. E.g.:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       i = 1..9
       p = 3..14
       [[templates]]
           i = _i%(i)02d  # suffixes = _i01, _i02, ..., _i09
           # A double-percent gives a literal percent character
           p = %%p%(p)03d  # suffixes = %p003, %p004, ..., %p013, %p014


Parameters as Full Task Names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Parameter values can be used as full task names, but the default template
should be overridden to remove the initial underscore. For example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       i = 1..4
       obs = ship, buoy, plane
       [[templates]]
           i = i%(i)d  # task name must begin with an alphabet
           obs = %(obs)s
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               foo => <i>  # foo => i1 & i2 & i3 & i4
               <obs> => bar  # ship & buoy & plane => bar
           """


Passing Values To Tasks
-----------------------

Parameter values are passed as environment variables to tasks generated by
parameter expansion. For example, if we have:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           obs = ship, buoy, plane
           run = 1..5
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = model<run,obs>

Then task ``model_run2_ship`` would get the following standard
environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

   # In a job script of an instance of the "model_run2_ship" task:
   export CYLC_TASK_PARAM_run="2"
   export CYLC_TASK_PARAM_obs="ship"

These variables allow tasks to determine which member of a parameterized
group they are, and so to vary their behaviour accordingly.

You can also define custom variables and string templates for parameter value
substitution. For example, if we add this to the above configuration:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[model<run,obs>]]
           [[[environment]]]
               MYNAME = %(obs)sy-mc%(obs)sface
               MYFILE = /path/to/run%(run)03d/%(obs)s

Then task ``model_run2_ship`` would get the following custom
environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

   # In a job script of an instance of the "model_run2_ship" task:
   export MYNAME=shipy-mcshipface
   export MYFILE=/path/to/run002/ship


Selecting Specific Values
-------------------------

Specific parameter values can be singled out in the graph and under
:cylc:conf:`[runtime]` with the notation ``<p=5>`` (for example).
Here's how to make a special task trigger off just the first of a
set of model runs:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
           run = 1..5
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               model<run> => post_proc<run>  # general case
               model<run=1> => check_first_run  # special case
            """
   [runtime]
       [[model<run>]]
           # config for all "model" runs...
       [[model<run=1>]]
           # special config (if any) for the first model run...
       #...


Selecting Partial Ranges
------------------------

The parameter notation does not currently support partial range selection such
as ``foo<p=5..10>``, but you can achieve the same result by defining a
second parameter that covers the partial range and giving it the same expansion
template as the full-range parameter. For example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       run = 1..10  # 1, 2, ..., 10
       runx = 1..3  # 1, 2, 3
       [[parameter templates]]
           run = _R%(run)02d   # _R01, _R02, ..., _R10
           runx = _R%(runx)02d  # _R01, _R02, _R03
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """model<run> => post<run>
                   model<runx> => checkx<runx>"""
   [runtime]
       [[model<run>]]
           # ...
       #...


Offsets in the Graph
---------------------

A negative offset notation ``<NAME-1>`` is interpreted as the previous
value in the ordered list of parameter values, while a positive offset is
interpreted as the next value. For example, to split a model run into multiple
steps with each step depending on the previous one, either of these graph lines:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   model<run-1> => model<run>  # for run = 1, 2, 3
   model<run> => model<run+1>  # for run = 1, 2, 3

expands to:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   model_run1 => model_run2
   model_run2 => model_run3

   # or equivalently:

   model_run1 => model_run2 => model_run3

And this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   proc<size-1> => proc<size>  # for size = small, big, huge

expands to:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   proc_small => proc_big
   proc_big => proc_huge

   # or equivalently:

   proc_small => proc_big => proc_huge

.. _taskfamilies.parameters:

Task Families and Parameters
----------------------------

Task family members can be generated by parameter expansion:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[FAM]]
       [[member<r>]]
           inherit = FAM
   # Result: family FAM contains member_r1, member_r2, etc.


Family names can be parameterized too, just like task names:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[RUN<r>]]
       [[model<r>]]
           inherit = RUN<r>
       [[post_proc<r>]]
           inherit = RUN<r>
   # Result: family RUN_r1 contains model_r1 and post_proc_r1,
   #         family RUN_r2 contains model_r2 and post_proc_r1, etc.

As described in :ref:`FamilyTriggers` family names can be used to
trigger all members at once:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   foo => FAMILY

or to trigger off all members:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   FAMILY:succeed-all => bar

or to trigger off any members:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   FAMILY:succeed-any => bar

If the members of ``FAMILY`` were generated with parameters, you can
also trigger them all at once with parameter notation:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   foo => member<m>

Similarly, to trigger off all members:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   member<m> => bar
   # (member<m>:fail etc., for other trigger types)

Family names are still needed in the graph, however, to succinctly express
"succeed-any" triggering semantics, and all-to-all or any-to-all triggering:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   FAM1:succeed-any => FAM2

(Direct all-to-all and any-to-all family triggering is not recommended for
efficiency reasons though - see :ref:`EfficientInterFamilyTriggering`).

For family *member-to-member* triggering use parameterized members.
For example, if family ``OBS_GET`` has members ``get<obs>`` and
family ``OBS_PROC`` has members ``proc<obs>`` then this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   get<obs> => proc<obs>  # for obs = ship, buoy, plane

expands to:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   get_ship => proc_ship
   get_buoy => proc_buoy
   get_plane => proc_plane


.. _Parameterized Cycling:

Parameterized Cycling
---------------------

For smaller workflows of finite duration, parameter expansion can be used to
generate a sequence of pre-defined tasks as a proxy for cycling.

Here's a cycling workflow of two-monthly model runs for one year, with
previous-instance model dependence:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       final cycle point = 2020-12
       [[graph]]
           # Run once, at the initial point.
           R1 = "prep => model"
           # Run at 2-month intervals between the initial and final points.
           P2M = "model[-P2M] => model => post_proc & archive"
   [runtime]
       [[model]]
           script = "run-model $CYLC_TASK_CYCLE_POINT"


And here's how to do the same thing with parameterized tasks instead of cycling:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       chunk = 1..6
   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = """
               prep => model<chunk=1>
               model<chunk-1> => model<chunk> =>
               post_proc<chunk> & archive<chunk>
            """
   [runtime]
       [[model<chunk>]]
           script = """
               # Compute start date from chunk index and interval.
               INITIAL_POINT=2020-01
               INTERVAL_MONTHS=2
               OFFSET_MONTHS=(( (CYLC_TASK_PARAM_chunk - 1)*INTERVAL_MONTHS ))
               OFFSET=P${OFFSET_MONTHS}M  # e.g. P4M for chunk=3
               # Run the model.
               run-model $(cylc cyclepoint --offset=$OFFSET $INITIAL_POINT)
           """

The two workflows achieve the same result, and both can include special
behaviour at the start, end, or anywhere in between.

.. todo
   Create sub-figures if possible: for now hacked as separate figures with
   link and caption on final displayed figure.

.. figure:: ../../img/eg2-static.png
   :align: center

.. _fig-eg2:

.. figure:: ../../img/eg2-dynamic.png
   :align: center

   Parameterized (top) and cycling (bottom) versions of the same
   workflow. The first three cycle points are shown in the
   cycling case. The parameterized case does not have cycle points (technically
   all of its tasks have the cycle point 1).

The parameterized version has several disadvantages, however:

  - The workflow must be finite in extent and not too large because every
    parameterized task generates a new task definition

    - (In a cycling workflow a single task definition acts as a template for
      all cycle point instances of a task)
  - Datetime arithmetic has to be done manually

    - (This doesn't apply if it's not a datetime sequence; parameterized
      integer cycling is straightforward.)


Parameterized Sub-Cycles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A workflow can have multiple main cycling sequences, but sub-cycles within each
main cycle point have to be parameterized. A typical use case for this is
incremental processing of files generated sequentially during a long model run.

Here's a workflow that uses parameters to split a long model run in each
datetime cycle point into four smaller runs:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       chunk = 1..4
   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       [[graph]]
           P1Y = """
               model<chunk-1> => model<chunk>
               model<chunk=4>[-P1Y] => model<chunk=1>
           """

The intercycle trigger connects the first chunk in each cycle point to the
last chunk in the previous cycle point. However, in this particular case it
might be simpler to use a 3-monthly datetime cycle instead:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       [[graph]]
           P3M = "model[-P3M] => model"


For another example, here task ``model`` generates 10 files in sequence as it
runs. Task ``proc_file0`` triggers when the model starts running, to wait for
and process the first file; when that is done, ``proc_file1`` triggers to wait
for the second file; and so on.

.. code-block:: cylc

   [task parameters]
       file = 0..9
   [scheduling]
       initial cycle point = 2020-01
       [[graph]]
           P1Y = """
               model:start => proc<file=0>
               proc<file-1> => proc<file>
               proc<file=9> => upload_products
           """
   [runtime]
       [[proc<file>]]
       # ...


Offsets at Sequence Start
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In cycling workflows, dependence on tasks prior to the start cycle point is
ignored [1]_. So this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc

   P1D = "model[-P1D] => model"

simplifies at the initial cycle point to this:

.. code-block:: cylc

   P1D = "model"

(Note this is a convenient way to bootstrap into an infinite cycle, but special
behaviour at the start point can be configured explicitly if desired).

Similarly, parameter offsets that go out of range are ignored. So this graph:

.. code-block:: cylc

   # for chunk = 1..4
   R1 = "model<chunk-1> => model<chunk>"

simplifies for ``chunk=1`` to this:

.. code-block:: cylc

   R1 = "model_chunk0"


.. [1] Currently this only applies to the unique workflow start cycle point, so
       it may be easier to use parameterized cycling if you have multiple
       (finite) sequences starting at different points. We plan to extend this
       convenience to all sequences regardless of start point, but use will be
       optional because delayed-start cycling tasks may need to trigger off of
       earlier cycles.
