src/user-guide/writing-workflows/scheduler.rst, before:

Scheduler Configuration
=======================

The :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler]` section configures certain aspects of
:term:`scheduler` behaviour at the workflow level.

Many of these configurations can also be defined at the site or user level in
the :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler]` section where it applies to all
workflows.


Event handlers
--------------

.. note::

   Workflow event handlers are configured by:

   * :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler][events]`
   * :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][events]`

Workflow event handlers allow configurable actions to be performed when
workflow events occur.

Workflow Events
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The list of events is:

startup
   The scheduler started running the workflow.
shutdown
   The workflow finished and the scheduler will shut down.
abort
   The scheduler will shut down even though the workflow didn't finish.
workflow timeout
   The workflow run timed out.
stall
   The workflow stalled.
stall timeout
   The workflow timed out after stalling.
inactivity timeout
   The workflow timed out with no activity.

You can also tell the scheduler to abort the run on certain workflow events,
with the following settings:

- abort on stall timeout
- abort on inactivity timeout
- abort on workflow timeout

Mail Events
^^^^^^^^^^^

Cylc can send emails for workflow events, these are configured by
:cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler][events]mail events`.

For example with the following configuration, emails will be sent if a
scheduler stalls or shuts down for an unexpected reason.

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[events]]
           mail events = stall, abort

Email addresses and servers are configured by
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][mail]`.

Workflow event emails can be customised using
:cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler][mail]footer`,
:ref:`workflow_event_template_variables` can be used.

For example to integrate with the Cylc 7 web interface (Cylc Review) the mail
footer could be configured with a URL:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[events]]
           mail footer = http://cylc-review/taskjobs/%(owner)s/?suite=%(workflow)s

Custom Event Handlers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cylc can also be configured to invoke scripts on workflow events.

Event handler scripts can be stored in the workflow ``bin`` directory, or
anywhere in ``$PATH`` in the :term:`scheduler` environment.

They should return quickly to avoid tying up the scheduler process pool -
see :ref:`Managing External Command Execution`.

Contextual information can be passed to the event handler via
:ref:`workflow_event_template_variables`.

For example the following configuration will write some information to a file
when a workflow is started:

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: ~/cylc-run/<workflow-id>/bin/my-handler

   #!/bin/bash

   echo "Workflow $1 is running on $2:$3" > info

.. code-block:: cylc
   :caption: flow.cylc or global.cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[events]]
           startup handlers = my-handler %(workflow)s %(host) %(port)

.. _workflow_event_template_variables:

Workflow Event Template Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. autoenumvalues:: cylc.flow.workflow_events.EventData


.. _Managing External Command Execution:

External Command Execution
--------------------------

Job submission commands, event handlers, and job poll and kill commands, are
executed by the :term:`scheduler` in a subprocess pool. The pool is size can
be configured with :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler]process pool size`.

Event handlers should be lightweight and quick-running because they tie up
a process pool member until complete, and the workflow will appear to stall if
the pool is saturated with long-running processes.

To protect the scheduler, processes are killed on a timeout
(:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler]process pool timeout`). This will be
logged by the :term:`scheduler`. If a job submission gets killed, the
associated task goes to the ``submit-failed`` state.


.. _Submitting Workflows To a Pool Of Hosts:

Submitting Workflows To a Pool Of Hosts
---------------------------------------

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]`.

By default ``cylc play`` will run workflows on the machine where the command
was invoked.

Cylc supports configuring a pool of hosts for workflows to run on,
``cylc play`` will automatically pick a host and submit the workflow to it.

Host Pool
^^^^^^^^^

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]available`.

The hosts must:

1. Share a common ``$HOME`` directory.
2. Share a common Cylc global config (:cylc:conf:`global.cylc`).
3. Be set up to allow passwordless SSH between them.

Example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[run hosts]]
           available = host_1, host_2, host_3

Load Balancing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]ranking`.

Cylc can balance the load on the configured "run hosts" by ranking them in
order of available resource or by excluding hosts which fail to meet certain
criterion.

Example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[run hosts]]
           available = host_1, host_2, host_3
           ranking = """
               # filter out hosts with high server load
               getloadavg()[2] < 5

               # pick the host with the most available memory
               virtual_memory().available
           """

For more information see :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]ranking`.

.. _auto-stop-restart:

Workflow Migration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]condemned`.

Cylc has the ability to automatically stop workflows running on a particular
host and optionally, restart them on a different host. This can be useful if a
host needs to be taken off-line, e.g. for scheduled maintenance.

Example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[run hosts]]
           available = host_1, host_2, host_3
           # tell workflows on host_1 to move to another available host
           condemned = host_1

For more information see :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]ranking`.

Commit message:

auto restart: add note about enabling plugin
* Partially addresses https://github.com/cylc/cylc-flow/issues/4873

src/user-guide/writing-workflows/scheduler.rst, after:

Scheduler Configuration
=======================

The :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler]` section configures certain aspects of
:term:`scheduler` behaviour at the workflow level.

Many of these configurations can also be defined at the site or user level in
the :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler]` section where it applies to all
workflows.


Event handlers
--------------

.. note::

   Workflow event handlers are configured by:

   * :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler][events]`
   * :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][events]`

Workflow event handlers allow configurable actions to be performed when
workflow events occur.

Workflow Events
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The list of events is:

startup
   The scheduler started running the workflow.
shutdown
   The workflow finished and the scheduler will shut down.
abort
   The scheduler will shut down even though the workflow didn't finish.
workflow timeout
   The workflow run timed out.
stall
   The workflow stalled.
stall timeout
   The workflow timed out after stalling.
inactivity timeout
   The workflow timed out with no activity.

You can also tell the scheduler to abort the run on certain workflow events,
with the following settings:

- abort on stall timeout
- abort on inactivity timeout
- abort on workflow timeout

Mail Events
^^^^^^^^^^^

Cylc can send emails for workflow events, these are configured by
:cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler][events]mail events`.

For example with the following configuration, emails will be sent if a
scheduler stalls or shuts down for an unexpected reason.

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[events]]
           mail events = stall, abort

Email addresses and servers are configured by
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][mail]`.

Workflow event emails can be customised using
:cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[scheduler][mail]footer`,
:ref:`workflow_event_template_variables` can be used.

For example to integrate with the Cylc 7 web interface (Cylc Review) the mail
footer could be configured with a URL:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[events]]
           mail footer = http://cylc-review/taskjobs/%(owner)s/?suite=%(workflow)s

Custom Event Handlers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cylc can also be configured to invoke scripts on workflow events.

Event handler scripts can be stored in the workflow ``bin`` directory, or
anywhere in ``$PATH`` in the :term:`scheduler` environment.

They should return quickly to avoid tying up the scheduler process pool -
see :ref:`Managing External Command Execution`.

Contextual information can be passed to the event handler via
:ref:`workflow_event_template_variables`.

For example the following configuration will write some information to a file
when a workflow is started:

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: ~/cylc-run/<workflow-id>/bin/my-handler

   #!/bin/bash

   echo "Workflow $1 is running on $2:$3" > info

.. code-block:: cylc
   :caption: flow.cylc or global.cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[events]]
           startup handlers = my-handler %(workflow)s %(host) %(port)

.. _workflow_event_template_variables:

Workflow Event Template Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. autoenumvalues:: cylc.flow.workflow_events.EventData


.. _Managing External Command Execution:

External Command Execution
--------------------------

Job submission commands, event handlers, and job poll and kill commands, are
executed by the :term:`scheduler` in a subprocess pool. The pool is size can
be configured with :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler]process pool size`.

Event handlers should be lightweight and quick-running because they tie up
a process pool member until complete, and the workflow will appear to stall if
the pool is saturated with long-running processes.

To protect the scheduler, processes are killed on a timeout
(:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler]process pool timeout`). This will be
logged by the :term:`scheduler`. If a job submission gets killed, the
associated task goes to the ``submit-failed`` state.


.. _Submitting Workflows To a Pool Of Hosts:

Submitting Workflows To a Pool Of Hosts
---------------------------------------

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]`.

By default ``cylc play`` will run workflows on the machine where the command
was invoked.

Cylc supports configuring a pool of hosts for workflows to run on,
``cylc play`` will automatically pick a host and submit the workflow to it.

Host Pool
^^^^^^^^^

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]available`.

The hosts must:

1. Share a common ``$HOME`` directory
   (with eachother and anywhere the ``cylc play`` command is run).
2. Share a common Cylc global config (:cylc:conf:`global.cylc`).
3. Be set up to allow passwordless SSH between them.

Example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[run hosts]]
           available = host_1, host_2, host_3

Load Balancing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]ranking`.

Cylc can balance the load on the configured "run hosts" by ranking them in
order of available resource or by excluding hosts which fail to meet certain
criterion.

Example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[run hosts]]
           available = host_1, host_2, host_3
           ranking = """
               # filter out hosts with high server load
               getloadavg()[2] < 5

               # pick the host with the most available memory
               virtual_memory().available
           """

For more information see :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]ranking`.

.. _auto-stop-restart:

Workflow Migration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:Configured by: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]condemned`.

Cylc has the ability to automatically stop workflows running on a particular
host and optionally, restart them on a different host. This can be useful if a
host needs to be taken off-line, e.g. for scheduled maintenance.

Example:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       [[run hosts]]
           available = host_1, host_2, host_3
           # tell workflows on host_1 to move to another available host
           condemned = host_1

.. note::

   .. cylc-scope:: global.cylc[scheduler][main loop]

   This feature requires the :cylc:conf:`[auto restart]`
   plugin to be enabled, e.g. in the configured list of
   :cylc:conf:`plugins`.

   .. cylc-scope::

For more information see: :cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][run hosts]ranking`.
