src/tutorial/furthertopics/retries.rst, before:

Retries
=======

Retries allow us to automatically re-submit tasks which have failed due to
failure in submission or execution.


Purpose
-------

Retries can be useful for tasks that may occasionally fail due to external
events, and are routinely fixable when they do - an example would be a task
that is dependent on a system that experiences temporary outages.

If a task fails, the Cylc retry mechanism can resubmit it after a
pre-determined delay. An environment variable, ``$CYLC_TASK_TRY_NUMBER``
is incremented and passed into the task - this means you can write your
task script so that it changes behaviour accordingly.


Example
-------

.. image:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Double-six-dice.jpg
   :width: 200px
   :align: right
   :alt: Two dice both showing the number six

Create a new workflow by running the following commands::

   mkdir -p ~/cylc-run/retries-tutorial
   cd ~/cylc-run/retries-tutorial

And paste the following code into a ``flow.cylc`` file. This workflow has a
``roll_doubles`` task that simulates trying to roll doubles using two dice:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       UTC mode = True # Ignore DST

   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = start => roll_doubles => win

   [runtime]
       [[start]]
       [[win]]
       [[roll_doubles]]
           script = """
               sleep 10
               RANDOM=$$  # Seed $RANDOM
               DIE_1=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
               DIE_2=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
               echo "Rolled $DIE_1 and $DIE_2..."
               if (($DIE_1 == $DIE_2)); then
                   echo "doubles!"
               else
                   exit 1
               fi
           """


Running Without Retries
-----------------------

Let's see what happens when we run the workflow as it is. Open the ``cylc gui``::

   cylc gui retries-tutorial &

Then run the workflow::

   cylc play retries-tutorial

.. TODO - check this tutorial still works now that cylc run/restart has been
   replaced by cylc play

Unless you're lucky, the workflow should fail at the roll_doubles task.

Stop the workflow::

   cylc stop retries-tutorial


Configuring Retries
-------------------

We need to tell Cylc to retry it a few times. To do this, add the following
to the end of the ``[[roll_doubles]]`` task section in the :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` file:

.. code-block:: cylc

   execution retry delays = 5*PT6S

This means that if the ``roll_doubles`` task fails, Cylc expects to
retry running it 5 times before finally failing. Each retry will have
a delay of 6 seconds.

We can apply multiple retry periods with the ``execution retry delays`` setting
by separating them with commas, for example the following line would tell Cylc
to retry a task four times, once after 15 seconds, then once after 10 minutes,
then once after one hour then once after three hours.

.. code-block:: cylc

   execution retry delays = PT15S, PT10M, PT1H, PT3H


Running With Retries
--------------------

If you closed it, re-open the ``cylc gui``::

   cylc gui retries-tutorial &

Re-run the workflow::

   cylc play retries-tutorial

What you should see is Cylc retrying the ``roll_doubles`` task. Hopefully,
it will succeed (there is only about a about a 1 in 3 chance of every task
failing) and the workflow will continue.


Altering Behaviour
------------------

We can alter the behaviour of the task based on the number of retries, using
``$CYLC_TASK_TRY_NUMBER``.

Change the ``script`` setting for the ``roll_doubles`` task to this::

   sleep 10
   RANDOM=$$  # Seed $RANDOM
   DIE_1=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
   DIE_2=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
   echo "Rolled $DIE_1 and $DIE_2..."
   if (($DIE_1 == $DIE_2)); then
       echo "doubles!"
   elif (($CYLC_TASK_TRY_NUMBER >= 2)); then
       echo "look over there! ..."
       echo "doubles!"  # Cheat!
   else
       exit 1
   fi

If your workflow is still running, stop it, then run it again.

This time, the task should definitely succeed before the third retry.


Further Reading
---------------

For more information see the `Cylc User Guide`_.

Commit message:

Fix additional tutorials (#388)
* Updated clock-triggered-tasks tutorial
* fix cylc broadcast torial
* fixed up family triggers tutorial
* Inheritance tutorial
* updated queues tutorial
* updated retries
* updated message triggeres tutorial
* add cylc validate prior to all instances of cylc install
* fixed flow.cylc indentation
* Apply suggestions from code review
Co-authored-by: Oliver Sanders <oliver.sanders@metoffice.gov.uk>
Co-authored-by: Ronnie Dutta <61982285+MetRonnie@users.noreply.github.com>
* refactor refs to GUI/TUI
* Apply suggestions from code review
Co-authored-by: Ronnie Dutta <61982285+MetRonnie@users.noreply.github.com>
*Ensure user has a UI running before playing a workflow which might
otherwise run too fast to see.
* Update src/tutorial/furthertopics/clock-triggered-tasks.rst
Co-authored-by: Ronnie Dutta <61982285+MetRonnie@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Oliver Sanders <oliver.sanders@metoffice.gov.uk>

src/tutorial/furthertopics/retries.rst, after:

Retries
=======

Retries allow us to automatically re-submit tasks which have failed due to
failure in submission or execution.


Purpose
-------

Retries can be useful for tasks that may occasionally fail due to external
events, and are routinely fixable when they do - an example would be a task
that is dependent on a system that experiences temporary outages.

If a task fails, the Cylc retry mechanism can resubmit it after a
pre-determined delay. An environment variable, ``$CYLC_TASK_TRY_NUMBER``
is incremented and passed into the task - this means you can write your
task script so that it changes behaviour accordingly.


Example
-------

.. image:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/73/Double-six-dice.jpg
   :width: 200px
   :align: right
   :alt: Two dice both showing the number six

Create a new workflow by running the following commands::

   mkdir -p ~/cylc-src/retries-tutorial
   cd ~/cylc-src/retries-tutorial

And paste the following code into a ``flow.cylc`` file. This workflow has a
``roll_doubles`` task that simulates trying to roll doubles using two dice:

.. code-block:: cylc

   [scheduler]
       UTC mode = True # Ignore DST

   [scheduling]
       [[graph]]
           R1 = start => roll_doubles => win

   [runtime]
       [[start]]
       [[win]]
       [[roll_doubles]]
           script = """
               sleep 10
               RANDOM=$$  # Seed $RANDOM
               DIE_1=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
               DIE_2=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
               echo "Rolled $DIE_1 and $DIE_2..."
               if (($DIE_1 == $DIE_2)); then
                   echo "doubles!"
               else
                   exit 1
               fi
           """


Running Without Retries
-----------------------

Let's see what happens when we run the workflow as it is.
Look at the workflow with :ref:`tutorial.gui` or :ref:`tutorial.tui`

Then validate install and run the workflow::

   cylc validate .
   cylc install
   cylc play retries-tutorial

Unless you're lucky, the workflow should fail at the roll_doubles task.

Stop the workflow::

   cylc stop retries-tutorial


Configuring Retries
-------------------

We need to tell Cylc to retry it a few times. To do this, add the following
to the end of the ``[[roll_doubles]]`` task section in the :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` file:

.. code-block:: cylc

   execution retry delays = 5*PT6S

This means that if the ``roll_doubles`` task fails, Cylc expects to
retry running it 5 times before finally failing. Each retry will have
a delay of 6 seconds.

We can apply multiple retry periods with the ``execution retry delays`` setting
by separating them with commas, for example the following line would tell Cylc
to retry a task four times, once after 15 seconds, then once after 10 minutes,
then once after one hour then once after three hours.

.. code-block:: cylc

   execution retry delays = PT15S, PT10M, PT1H, PT3H


Running With Retries
--------------------

Look at the workflow with :ref:`tutorial.gui` or :ref:`tutorial.tui`

Re-install and run the workflow::

   cylc validate .
   cylc install
   cylc play retries-tutorial

What you should see is Cylc retrying the ``roll_doubles`` task. Hopefully,
it will succeed (there is only about a about a 1 in 3 chance of every task
failing) and the workflow will continue.


Altering Behaviour
------------------

We can alter the behaviour of the task based on the number of retries, using
``$CYLC_TASK_TRY_NUMBER``.

Change the ``script`` setting for the ``roll_doubles`` task to this::

   sleep 10
   RANDOM=$$  # Seed $RANDOM
   DIE_1=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
   DIE_2=$((RANDOM%6 + 1))
   echo "Rolled $DIE_1 and $DIE_2..."
   if (($DIE_1 == $DIE_2)); then
       echo "doubles!"
   elif (($CYLC_TASK_TRY_NUMBER >= 2)); then
       echo "look over there! ..."
       echo "doubles!"  # Cheat!
   else
       exit 1
   fi

If your workflow is still running, stop it, then run it again.

This time, the task should definitely succeed before the third retry.


Further Reading
---------------

For more information see the `Cylc User Guide`_.
