src/architecture.rst, before:

Architecture
============

Web
---

WebSocket
~~~~~~~~~

The Cylc Web UI uses `Apollo Client`_ to handle GraphQL query
requests. A GraphQL query is used to create a `GraphQL subscription`_.

Once a subscription is created, the server will send back a message
with the query result whenever there is new data available.

In order to handle the communication between the client and the
server, Apollo Client uses WebSockets. It will have one WebSocket
per user session.

.. figure:: img/architecture/websocket-communication.png
   :align: center

Every message received by the server is added to a queue, and processed
by the server as soon as possible.

The server uses the Cylc UI Server schema and resolvers to validate the
query and to fetch data from the data store for the query response.

The query result is then serialized as JSON and sent back to the client.
The work of the Apollo Client ends after it pushes the data to the Vuex
store.

The communication between client and server follows a protocol
called `graphql-ws protocol`_.

.. figure:: img/architecture/websocket-graphql-ws-protocol.png
   :align: center

After a channel between client and server is open, the messages
follow that protocol, starting by the ``connection init`` message,
that simply expects an ``ack`` back from the server.

The next message will be a ``start``, which will contain the
GraphQL query subscription. If there were no errors, the client and
server susbcription is established, and the client will start
receiving the GraphQL responses.

The protocol also supports other messages, such as ``stop``, to
tell the server it doesn't need to send any more data as that
subscription is now cancelled.

.. _`Apollo Client`: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/
.. _`GraphQL subscription`: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/data/subscriptions/
.. _`graphql-ws protocol`: https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md

Commit message:

Clarify the ack message meaning and requirements

src/architecture.rst, after:

Architecture
============

Web
---

WebSocket
~~~~~~~~~

The Cylc Web UI uses `Apollo Client`_ to handle GraphQL query
requests. A GraphQL query is used to create a `GraphQL subscription`_.

Once a subscription is created, the server will send back a message
with the query result whenever there is new data available.

In order to handle the communication between the client and the
server, Apollo Client uses WebSockets. It will have one WebSocket
per user session.

.. figure:: img/architecture/websocket-communication.png
   :align: center

Every message received by the server is added to a queue, and processed
by the server as soon as possible.

The server uses the Cylc UI Server schema and resolvers to validate the
query and to fetch data from the data store for the query response.

The query result is then serialized as JSON and sent back to the client.
The work of the Apollo Client ends after it pushes the data to the Vuex
store.

The communication between client and server follows a protocol
called `graphql-ws protocol`_.

.. figure:: img/architecture/websocket-graphql-ws-protocol.png
   :align: center

After a channel between client and server is open, the messages
follow that protocol, starting by the ``connection init`` message,
that simply expects an ``ack`` message back from the server,
where the ``ack`` is an acknowlegdement to the client - note
that the protocol does not define an ``ack`` as a MUST, but
rather as a MAY, so a client may interpret not receiving an
error as an acknowledgement to proceed as well.

The next message will be a ``start``, which will contain the
GraphQL query subscription. If there were no errors, the client and
server susbcription is established, and the client will start
receiving the GraphQL responses.

The protocol also supports other messages, such as ``stop``, to
tell the server it doesn't need to send any more data as that
subscription is now cancelled.

.. _`Apollo Client`: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/
.. _`GraphQL subscription`: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/data/subscriptions/
.. _`graphql-ws protocol`: https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md
